--- PAGE 1 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon
Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney
Institute for Information Technology, National Research Council Canada.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6
{saif.mohammad,peter.turney}@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Even though considerable attention has been given to the polarity of words (positive and
negative) and the creation of large polarity lexicons, research in emotion analysis has had to rely
on limited and small emotion lexicons. In this paper we show how the combined strength and
wisdom of the crowds can be used to generate a large, high-quality, word–emotion and word–polarity
association lexicon quickly and inexpensively. We enumerate the challenges in emotion annotation
in a crowdsourcing scenario and propose solutions to address them. Most notably, in addition to
questions about emotions associated with terms, we show how the inclusion of a word choice question
can discourage malicious data entry, help identify instances where the annotator may not be familiar
with the target term (allowing us to reject such annotations), and help obtain annotations at sense
level (rather than at word level). We conducted experiments on how to formulate the emotion-
annotation questions, and show that asking if a term isassociated with an emotion leads to markedly
higher inter-annotator agreement than that obtained by asking if a term evokes an emotion.
Key words: Emotions, aﬀect, polarity, semantic orientation, crowdsourcing, Mechanical
Turk, emotion lexicon, polarity lexicon, word–emotion associations, sentiment analysis.
1. INTRODUCTION
We call upon computers and algorithms to assist us in sifting through enormous amounts of data
and also to understand the content—for example, “What is being said about a certain target entity?”
(Common target entities include a company, product, policy, person, and country.) Lately, we are
going further, and also asking questions such as: “Is something good or bad being said about the
target entity?” and “Is the speaker happy with, angry at, or fearful of the target?”. This is the area
of sentiment analysis , which involves determining the opinions and private states (beliefs, feelings,
and speculations) of the speaker towards a target entity (Wiebe, 1994). Sentiment analysis has a
number of applications, for example in managing customer relations, where an automated system
may transfer an angry, agitated caller to a higher-level manager. An increasing number of companies
want to automatically track the response to their product (especially when there are new releases
and updates) on blogs, forums, social networking sites such as Twitter and Facebook, and the World
Wide Web in general. (More applications listed in Section 2.) Thus, over the last decade, there has
been considerable work in sentiment analysis, and especially in determining whether a word, phrase,
or document has a positive polarity, that is, it is expressing a favorable sentiment towards an entity,
or whether it has a negative polarity, that is, it is expressing an unfavorable sentiment towards an
entity (Lehrer, 1974; Turney and Littman, 2003; Pang and Lee, 2008). (This sense of polarity is also
referred to as semantic orientation and valence in the literature.) However, much research remains
to be done on the problem of automatic analysis of emotions in text.
Emotions are often expressed through diﬀerent facial expressions (Aristotle, 1913; Russell, 1994).
Diﬀerent emotions are also expressed through diﬀerent words. For example, delightful and yummy
indicate the emotion of joy,gloomy and cry are indicative of sadness,shout and boiling are indicative of
anger, and so on. In this paper, we are interested in how emotions manifest themselves in language
through words. 1 We describe an annotation project aimed at creating a large lexicon of term–
emotion associations. A term is either a word or a phrase. Each entry in this lexicon includes a
term, an emotion, and a measure of how strongly the term is associated with the emotion. Instead of
1This paper expands on work ﬁrst published in Mohammad and Turney (2010).
iC 2013 National Research Council Canada
arXiv:1308.6297v1  [cs.CL]  28 Aug 2013

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Computational Intelligence
providing deﬁnitions for the diﬀerent emotions, we give the annotators examples of words associated
with diﬀerent emotions and rely on their intuition of what diﬀerent emotions mean and how language
is used to express emotion.
Terms may evoke diﬀerent emotions in diﬀerent contexts, and the emotion evoked by a phrase
or a sentence is not simply the sum of emotions conveyed by the words in it. However, the emotion
lexicon can be a useful component for a sophisticated emotion detection algorithm required for many
of the applications described in the next section. The term–emotion association lexicon will also be
useful for evaluating automatic methods that identify the emotions associated with a word. Such
algorithms may then be used to automatically generate emotion lexicons in languages where no
such lexicons exist. As of now, high-quality, high-coverage, emotion lexicons do not exist for any
language, although there are a few limited-coverage lexicons for a handful of languages, for example,
the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon (WAL) (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004), the General Inquirer (GI)
(Stone et al., 1966), and the Aﬀective Norms for English Words (ANEW) (Bradley and Lang, 1999).
The lack of emotion resources can be attributed to high cost and considerable manual eﬀort
required of the human annotators in a traditional setting where hand-picked experts are hired to do
all the annotation. However, lately a new model has evolved to do large amounts of work quickly
and inexpensively. Crowdsourcing is the act of breaking down work into many small independent
units and distributing them to a large number of people, usually over the web. Howe and Robinson
(2006), who coined the term, deﬁne it as follows: 2
The act of a company or institution taking a function once performed by employees and
outsourcing it to an undeﬁned (and generally large) network of people in the form of an open
call. This can take the form of peer-production (when the job is performed collaboratively), but
is also often undertaken by sole individuals. The crucial prerequisite is the use of the open call
format and the large network of potential laborers.
Some well-known crowdsourcing projects include Wikipedia, Threadless, iStockphoto, InnoCentive,
Netﬂix Prize, and Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. 3
Mechanical Turk is an online crowdsourcing platform that is especially suited for tasks that can
be done over the Internet through a computer or a mobile device. It is already being used to obtain
human annotation on various linguistic tasks (Snowet al., 2008; Callison-Burch, 2009). However, one
must deﬁne the task carefully to obtain annotations of high quality. Several checks must be placed
to ensure that random and erroneous annotations are discouraged, rejected, and re-annotated.
In this paper, we show how we compiled a large English term–emotion association lexicon by
manual annotation through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service. This dataset, which we callEmoLex,
is an order of magnitude larger than the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon. We focus on the emotions of joy,
sadness, anger, fear, trust, disgust, surprise, and anticipation—argued by many to be the basic and
prototypical emotions (Plutchik, 1980). The terms in EmoLex are carefully chosen to include some
of the most frequent English nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. In addition to unigrams, EmoLex
has many commonly used bigrams as well. We also include words from the General Inquirer and
the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon to allow comparison of annotations between the various resources. We
perform extensive analysis of the annotations to answer several questions, including the following:
1. How hard is it for humans to annotate words with their associated emotions?
2. How can emotion-annotation questions be phrased to make them accessible and clear to the
average English speaker?
3. Do small diﬀerences in how the questions are asked result in signiﬁcant annotation diﬀerences?
4. Are emotions more commonly evoked by nouns, verbs, adjectives, or adverbs? How common are
emotion terms among the various parts of speech?
5. How much do people agree on the association of a given emotion with a given word?
6. Is there a correlation between the polarity of a word and the emotion associated with it?
7. Which emotions tend to go together; that is, which emotions are associated with the same terms?
2http://crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06
3 Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org, Threadless: http://www.threadless.com,
iStockphoto: http://www.istockphoto.com, InnoCentive: http://www.innocentive.com,
Netﬂix prize: http://www.netﬂixprize.com, Mechanical Turk: https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome

--- PAGE 3 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 3
Our lexicon now has close to 10,000 terms and ongoing work will make it even larger (we are aiming
for about 40,000 terms).
2. APPLICATIONS
The automatic recognition of emotions is useful for a number of tasks, including the following:
1. Managing customer relations by taking appropriate actions depending on the customer’s emo-
tional state (for example, dissatisfaction, satisfaction, sadness, trust, anticipation, or anger)
(Bougie et al., 2003).
2. Tracking sentiment towards politicians, movies, products, countries, and other target entities
(Pang and Lee, 2008; Mohammad and Yang, 2011).
3. Developing sophisticated search algorithms that distinguish between diﬀerent emotions associ-
ated with a product (Knautz et al., 2010). For example, customers may search for banks, mutual
funds, or stocks that people trust. Aid organizations may search for events and stories that are
generating empathy, and highlight them in their fund-raising campaigns. Further, systems that
are not emotion-discerning may fall prey to abuse. For example, it was recently discovered that an
online vendor deliberately mistreated his customers because the negative online reviews translated
to higher rankings on Google searches. 4
4. Creating dialogue systems that respond appropriately to diﬀerent emotional states of the user;
for example, in emotion-aware games (Vel´ asquez, 1997; Ravajaet al., 2006).
5. Developing intelligent tutoring systems that manage the emotional state of the learner for more
eﬀective learning. There is some support for the hypothesis that students learn better and faster
when they are in a positive emotional state (Litman and Forbes-Riley, 2004).
6. Determining risk of repeat attempts by analyzing suicide notes (Osgood and Walker, 1959;
Matykiewicz et al., 2009; Pestian et al., 2008).5
7. Understanding how genders communicate through work-place and personal email (Mohammad
and Yang, 2011).
8. Assisting in writing e-mails, documents, and other text to convey the desired emotion (and
avoiding misinterpretation) (Liu et al., 2003).
9. Depicting the ﬂow of emotions in novels and other books (Boucouvalas, 2002; Mohammad,
2011b).
10. Identifying what emotion a newspaper headline is trying to evoke (Bellegarda, 2010).
11. Re-ranking and categorizing information/answers in online question–answer forums (Adamic
et al., 2008). For example, highly emotional responses may be ranked lower.
12. Detecting how people use emotion-bearing-words and metaphors to persuade and coerce others
(for example, in propaganda) (Kˇ ovecses, 2003).
13. Developing more natural text-to-speech systems (Francisco and Gerv´ as, 2006; Bellegarda, 2010).
14. Developing assistive robots that are sensitive to human emotions (Breazeal and Brooks, 2004;
Hollinger et al., 2006). For example, the robotics group in Carnegie Melon University is interested
in building an emotion-aware physiotherapy coach robot.
Since we do not have space to fully explain all of these applications, we select one (the ﬁrst appli-
cation from the list: managing customer relations) to develop in more detail as an illustration of the
value of emotion-aware systems. Davenport et al. (2001) deﬁne customer relationship management
(CRM) systems as:
All the tools, technologies and procedures to manage, improve or facilitate sales, support and
related interactions with customers, prospects, and business partners throughout the enterprise.
Central to this process is keeping the customer satisﬁed. A number of studies have looked at
dissatisfaction and anger and shown how they can lead to complaints to company representatives,
4http://www.pcworld.com/article/212223/google algorithm will punish bad businesses.html
5The 2011 Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) challenge by the National Center for
Biomedical Computing is on detecting emotions in suicide notes.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Computational Intelligence
litigations against the company in courts, negative word of mouth , and other outcomes that are
detrimental to company goals (Maute and Forrester, 1993; Richins, 1987; Singh, 1988). Richins
(1984) deﬁnes negative word of mouth as:
Interpersonal communication among consumers concerning a marketing organization or prod-
uct which denigrates the object of the communication.
Anger, as indicated earlier, is clearly an emotion, and so is dissatisfaction (Ortony et al. , 1988;
Scherer, 1984; Shaver et al. , 1987; Weiner, 1985). Even though the two are somewhat correlated
(Folkes et al., 1987), Bougie et al. (2003) show through experiments and case studies that dissatis-
faction and anger are distinct emotions, leading to distinct actions by the consumer. Like Weiner
(1985), they argue that dissatisfaction is an “outcome-dependent emotion”, that is, it is a reaction
to an undesirable outcome of a transaction, and that it instigates the customer to determine the
reason for the undesirable outcome. If customers establish that it was their own fault, then this may
evoke an emotion of guilt or shame. If the situation was beyond anybody’s control, then it may
evoke sadness. However, if they feel that it was the fault of the service provider, then there is a
tendency to become angry. Thus, dissatisfaction is usually a precursor to anger (also supported by
Scherer (1982); Weiner (1985)), but may often instead lead to other emotions such as sadness, guilt,
and shame, too. Bougie et al. (2003) also show that dissatisfaction does not have a correlation with
complaints and negative word of mouth, when the data is controlled for anger. On the other hand,
anger has a strong correlation with complaining and negative word of mouth, even when satisfaction
is controlled for (D´ ıaz and Ruz, 2002; Dub´ e and Maute, 1996).
Consider a scenario in which a company has automated systems on the phone and on the web
to manage high-volume calls. Basic queries and simple complaints are handled automatically, but
non-trivial ones are forwarded to a team of qualiﬁed call handlers. It is usual for a large number
of customer interactions to have negative polarity terms because, after all, people often contact a
company because they are dissatisﬁed with a certain outcome. However, if the system is able to
detect that a certain caller is angry (and thus, if not placated, is likely to engage in negative word of
mouth about the company or the product), then it can immediately transfer the call to a qualiﬁed
higher-level human call handler.
Apart from keeping the customers satisﬁed, companies are also interested in developing a large
base of loyal customers. Customers loyal to a company buy more products, spend more money, and
also spread positive word of mouth (Harris and Goode, 2004). Oliver (1997), Dabholkar et al. (2000),
Harris and Goode (2004), and others give evidence that central to attaining loyal customers is the
amount of trust they have in the company. Trust is especially important in on-line services where it
has been shown that consumers buy more and return more often to shop when they trust a company
(Shankar et al., 2002; Reichheld and Schefter, 2000; Stewart, 2003).
Thus it is in the interest of the company to heed the consumers, not just when they call, but
also during online transactions and when they write about the company in their blogs, tweets,
consumer forums, and review websites so that they can immediately know whether the customers
are happy with, dissatisﬁed with, losing trust in, or angry with their product or a particular feature
of the product. This way they can take corrective action when necessary, and accentuate the most
positively evocative features. Further, an emotion-aware system can discover instances of high trust
and use them as sales opportunities (for example, oﬀering a related product or service for purchase).
3. EMOTIONS
Emotions are pervasive among humans, and many are innate. Some argue that even across
cultures that have no contact with each other, facial expressions for basic human emotions are
identical (Ekman and Friesen, 2003; Ekman, 2005). However, other studies argue that there may be
some universalities, but language and culture play an important role in shaping our emotions and
also in how they manifest themselves in facial expression (Elfenbein and Ambady, 1994; Russell,
1994). There is some contention on whether animals have emotions, but there are studies, espe-
cially for higher mammals, canines, felines, and even some ﬁsh, arguing in favor of the proposition
(Masson, 1996; Guo et al. , 2007). Some of the earliest work is by Charles Darwin in his book The
Expressions of the Emotions in Man and Animals (Darwin, 1872). Studies by evolutionary biologists

--- PAGE 5 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 5
and psychologists show that emotions have evolved to improve the reproductive ﬁtness for a species,
as they are triggers for behavior with high survival value. For example, fear inspires ﬁght-or-ﬂight
response. The more complex brains of primates and humans are capable of experiencing not just the
basic emotions such as fear and joy, but also more complex and nuanced emotions such as optimism
and shame. Similar to emotions, other phenomena such as mood also pertain to the evaluation of
one’s well-being and are together referred to as aﬀect (Scherer, 1984; Gross, 1998; Steunebrink,
2010). Unlike emotion, mood is not towards a speciﬁc thing, but more diﬀuse, and it lasts for longer
durations (Nowlis and Nowlis, 2001; Gross, 1998; Steunebrink, 2010).
Psychologists have proposed a number of theories that classify human emotions into taxonomies.
As mentioned earlier, some emotions are considered basic, whereas others are considered complex.
Some psychologists have classiﬁed emotions into those that we can sense and perceive ( instinctual),
and those that that we arrive at after some thinking and reasoning ( cognitive) (Zajonc, 1984).
However, others do not agree with such a distinction and argue that emotions do not precede
cognition (Lazarus, 1984, 2000). Plutchik (1985) argues that this debate may not be resolvable
because it does not lend itself to empirical proof and that the problem is a matter of deﬁnition.
There is a high correlation between the basic and instinctual emotions, as well as between complex
and cognitive emotions. Many of the basic emotions are also instinctual.
A number of theories have been proposed on which emotions are basic (Ekman, 1992; Plutchik,
1962; Parrot, 2001; James, 1884). See Ortony and Turner (1990) for a detailed review of many of these
models. Ekman (1992) argues that there are six basic emotions: joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust,
and surprise. Plutchik (1962, 1980, 1994) proposes a theory with eight basic emotions. These include
Ekman’s six as well as trust and anticipation. Plutchik organizes the emotions in a wheel (Figure 1).
The radius indicates intensity—the closer to the center, the higher the intensity. Plutchik argues
that the eight basic emotions form four opposing pairs, joy–sadness, anger–fear, trust–disgust, and
anticipation–surprise. This emotion opposition is displayed in Figure 1 by the spatial opposition
of these pairs. The ﬁgure also shows certain emotions, called primary dyads , in the white spaces
between the basic emotions, which he argues can be thought of as combinations of the adjoining
emotions. However it should be noted that emotions in general do not have clear boundaries and do
not always occur in isolation.
Since annotating words with hundreds of emotions is expensive for us and diﬃcult for annotators,
we decided to annotate words with Plutchik’s eight basic emotions. We do not claim that Plutchik’s
eight emotions are more fundamental than other categorizations; however, we adopted them for
annotation purposes because: (a) like some of the other choices of basic emotions, this choice too is
well-founded in psychological, physiological, and empirical research, (b) unlike some other choices,
for example that of Ekman, it is not composed of mostly negative emotions, (c) it is a superset of the
emotions proposed by some others (for example, it is a superset of Ekman’s six basic emotions), and
(d) in our future work, we will conduct new annotation experiments to empirically verify whether
certain pairs of these emotions are indeed in opposition or not, and whether the primary dyads can
indeed be thought of as combinations of the adjacent basic emotions.
4. RELATED WORK
Over the past decade, there has been a large amount of work on sentiment analysis that focuses
on positive and negative polarity. Pang and Lee (2008) provide an excellent summary. Here we focus
on the relatively small amount of work on generating emotion lexicons and on computational analysis
of the emotional content of text.
The WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon (WAL) (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) has a few hundred words
annotated with the emotions they evoke. 6 It was created by manually identifying the emotions of
a few seed words and then marking all their WordNet synonyms as having the same emotion. The
words in WAL are annotated for a number of emotion and aﬀect categories, but its creators also
provided a subset corresponding to the six Ekman emotions. In our Mechanical Turk experiments,
we re-annotate hundreds of words from the Ekman subset of WAL to determine how much the
6http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaﬀect.html

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Computational Intelligence
Figure 1. Plutchik’s wheel of emotions. Similar emotions are placed next to each other. Contrasting
emotions are placed diametrically opposite to each other. Radius indicates intensity. White spaces
in between the basic emotions represent primary dyads—complex emotions that are combinations
of adjacent basic emotions. (The image ﬁle is taken from Wikimedia Commons.)
emotion annotations obtained from untrained volunteers matches that obtained from the original
hand-picked judges (Section 10). General Inquirer (GI) (Stone et al., 1966) has 11,788 words labeled
with 182 categories of word tags, including positive and negative semantic orientation. 7 It also has
certain other aﬀect categories, such as pleasure, arousal, feeling, and pain, but these have not been
exploited to a signiﬁcant degree by the natural language processing community. In our Mechanical
Turk experiments, we re-annotate thousands of words from GI to determine how much the polarity
annotations obtained from untrained volunteers matches that obtained from the original hand-picked
judges (Section 11). Aﬀective Norms for English Words (ANEW) has pleasure (happy–unhappy),
arousal (excited–calm), and dominance (controlled–in control) ratings for 1034 words. 8
Automatic systems for analyzing emotional content of text follow many diﬀerent approaches: a
number of these systems look for speciﬁc emotion denoting words (Elliott, 1992), some determine the
tendency of terms to co-occur with seed words whose emotions are known (Read, 2004), some use
hand-coded rules (Neviarouskaya et al., 2009, 2010), and some use machine learning and a number of
emotion features, including emotion denoting words (Alm et al., 2005; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007).
Recent work by Bellegarda (2010) uses sophisticated dimension reduction techniques (variations of
latent semantic analysis), to automatically identify emotion terms, and obtains marked improvements
in classifying newspaper headlines into diﬀerent emotion categories. Goyal et al. (2010) move away
from classifying sentences from the writer’s perspective, towards attributing mental states to entities
7http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/∼inquirer
8http://csea.phhp.uﬂ.edu/media/anewmessage.html

--- PAGE 7 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 7
mentioned in the text. Their work deals with polarity, but work on attributing emotions to entities
mentioned in text is, similarly, a promising area of future work.
Much recent work focuses on six emotions studied by Ekman (1992) and Sautera et al. (2010).
These emotions—joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise—are a subset of the eight pro-
posed in Plutchik (1980). There is less work on complex emotions, for example, work by Pearl
and Steyvers (2010) that focuses on politeness, rudeness, embarrassment, formality, persuasion,
deception, conﬁdence, and disbelief. They developed a game-based annotation project for these
emotions. Francisco and Gerv´ as (2006) marked sentences in fairy tales with tags for pleasantness,
activation, and dominance, using lexicons of words associated with the three categories.
Emotion analysis can be applied to all kinds of text, but certain domains and modes of com-
munication tend have more overt expressions of emotions than others. Neviarouskaya et al. (2010),
Genereux and Evans (2006), and Mihalcea and Liu (2006) analyzed web-logs. Alm et al. (2005)
and Francisco and Gerv´ as (2006) worked on fairy tales. Boucouvalas (2002) and John et al. (2006)
explored emotions in novels. Zhe and Boucouvalas (2002), Holzman and Pottenger (2003), and Ma
et al. (2005) annotated chat messages for emotions. Liu et al. (2003) worked on email data.
There has also been some interesting work in visualizing emotions, for example that of Subasic
and Huettner (2001), Kalra and Karahalios (2005), and Rashid et al. (2006). Mohammad (2011a)
describes work on identifying colours associated with emotion words.
5. TARGET TERMS
In order to generate a word–emotion association lexicon, we ﬁrst identify a list of words and
phrases for which we want human annotations. We chose the Macquarie Thesaurus as our source
for unigrams and bigrams (Bernard, 1986). 9 The categories in the thesaurus act as coarse senses
of the words. (A word listed in two categories is taken to have two senses.) Any other published
dictionary would have worked well too. Apart from over 57,000 commonly used English word types,
the Macquarie Thesaurus also has entries for more than 40,000 commonly used phrases. From this
list we chose those terms that occurred frequently in the Google n-gram corpus (Brants and Franz,
2006). Speciﬁcally we chose the 200 most frequent unigrams and 200 most frequent bigrams from
four parts of speech: nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives. When selecting these sets, we ignored
terms that occurred in more than one Macquarie Thesaurus category. (There were only 187 adverb
bigrams that matched these criteria. All other sets had 200 terms each.) We chose all words from the
Ekman subset of the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon that had at most two senses (terms listed in at most
two thesaurus categories)—640 word–sense pairs in all. We included all terms in the General Inquirer
that were not too ambiguous (had at most three senses)—8132 word–sense pairs in all. (We started
the annotation on monosemous terms, and gradually included more ambiguous terms as we became
conﬁdent that the quality of annotations was acceptable.) Some of these terms occur in more than
one set. The union of the three sets (Google n-gram terms, WAL terms, and GI terms) has 10,170
term–sense pairs. Table 1 lists the various sets of target terms as well as the number of terms in
each set for which annotations were requested. EmoLex-Uni stands for all the unigrams taken from
the thesaurus. EmoLex-Bi refers to all the bigrams taken from the thesaurus. EmoLex-GI are all the
words taken from the General Inquirer. EmoLex-WAL are all the words taken from the WordNet
Aﬀect Lexicon.
6. MECHANICAL TURK
We used Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service as a platform to obtain large-scale emotion annota-
tions. An entity submitting a task to Mechanical Turk is called the requester. The requester breaks
the task into small independently solvable units calledHITs (Human Intelligence Tasks) and uploads
them on the Mechanical Turk website. The requester speciﬁes (1) some key words relevant to the
task to help interested people ﬁnd the HITs on Amazon’s website, (2) the compensation that will
9http://www.macquarieonline.com.au/thesaurus.html

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Computational Intelligence
Table 1. Break down of the target terms for which emotion annotations were requested.
EmoLex # of terms % of the Union
EmoLex-Uni:
Unigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 200 2.0%
adverbs 200 2.0%
nouns 200 2.0%
verbs 200 2.0%
EmoLex-Bi:
Bigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 200 2.0%
adverbs 187 1.8%
nouns 200 2.0%
verbs 200 2.0%
EmoLex-GI:
Terms from General Inquirer
negative terms 2119 20.8%
neutral terms 4226 41.6%
positive terms 1787 17.6%
EmoLex-WAL:
Terms from WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon
anger terms 165 1.6%
disgust terms 37 0.4%
fear terms 100 1.0%
joy terms 165 1.6%
sadness terms 120 1.2%
surprise terms 53 0.5%
Union 10170 100%
be paid for solving each HIT, and (3) the number of diﬀerent annotators that are to solve each HIT.
The people who provide responses to these HITs are called Turkers. Turkers usually search for tasks
by entering key words representative of the tasks they are interested in and often also by specifying
the minimum compensation per HIT they are willing to work for. The annotation provided by a
Turker for a HIT is called an assignment.
We created Mechanical Turk HITs for each of the terms speciﬁed in Section 5. Each HIT has
a set of questions, all of which are to be answered by the same person. (A complete example HIT
with directions and all questions is shown in Section 8 ahead.) We requested annotations from ﬁve
diﬀerent Turkers for each HIT. (A Turker cannot attempt multiple assignments for the same term.)
Diﬀerent HITS may be attempted by diﬀerent Turkers, and a Turker may attempt as many HITs as
they wish.
7. ISSUES WITH CROWDSOURCING AND EMOTION ANNOTATION
7.1. Key issues in crowdsourcing
Even though there are a number of beneﬁts to using Mechanical Turk, such as low cost,
less organizational overhead, and quick turn around time, there are also some inherent challenges.
First and foremost is quality control. The task and compensation may attract cheaters (who may
input random information) and even malicious annotators (who may deliberately enter incorrect
information). We have no control over the educational background of a Turker, and we cannot
expect the average Turker to read and follow complex and detailed directions. However, this may not
necessarily be a disadvantage of crowdsourcing. We believe that clear, brief, and simple instructions

--- PAGE 9 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 9
produce accurate annotations and higher inter-annotator agreements. Another challenge is ﬁnding
enough Turkers interested in doing the task. If the task does not require any special skills, then more
Turkers will do the task. The number of Turkers and the number of annotations they provide is also
dependent on how interesting they ﬁnd the task and how attractive they ﬁnd the compensation.
7.2. Finer points of emotion annotation
Native and ﬂuent speakers of a language are good at identifying emotions associated with words.
Therefore we do not require the annotators to have any special skills other than that they be native
or ﬂuent speakers of English. However, emotion annotation, especially in a crowdsource setting, has
some important challenges.
Words used in diﬀerent senses can evoke diﬀerent emotions. For example, the word shout evokes
a diﬀerent emotion when used in the context of admonishment than when used in “ Give me a shout
if you need any help. ” Getting human annotations for word senses is made complicated by decisions
about which sense-inventory to use and what level of granularity the senses must have. On the one
hand, we do not want to choose a ﬁne-grained sense-inventory because then the number of word–
sense combinations will become too large and diﬃcult to easily distinguish, and on the other hand
we do not want to work only at the word level because, when used in diﬀerent senses, a word may
evoke diﬀerent emotions.
Yet another challenge is how best to convey a word sense to the annotator. Including long
deﬁnitions will mean that the annotators have to spend more time reading the question, and because
their compensation is roughly proportional to the amount of time they spend on the task, the number
of annotations we can obtain for a given budget is impacted. Further, we want the users to annotate
a word only if they are already familiar with it and know its meanings. Deﬁnitions are good at
conveying the core meaning of a word but they are not so eﬀective in conveying the subtle emotional
connotations. Therefore we wanted to discourage Turkers from annotating for words they are not
familiar with. Lastly, we must ensure that malicious and erroneous annotations are discarded.
8. OUR APPROACH
In order to overcome the challenges described above, before asking the annotators questions
about which emotions are associated with a target term, we ﬁrst present them with a word choice
problem. They are provided with four diﬀerent words and asked which word is closest in meaning to
the target. Three of the four options are irrelevant distractors. The remaining option is a synonym
for one of the senses of the target word. This single question serves many purposes. Through this
question we convey the word sense for which annotations are to be provided, without actually
providing annotators with long deﬁnitions. That is, the correct choice guides the Turkers to the
intended sense of the target. Further, if an annotator is not familiar with the target word and
still attempts to answer questions pertaining to the target, or is randomly clicking options in our
questionnaire, then there is a 75% chance that they will get the answer to this question wrong, and
we can discard all responses pertaining to this target term by the annotator (that is, we also discard
answers to the emotion questions provided by the annotator for this target term).
We generated these word choice problems automatically using theMacquarie Thesaurus (Bernard,
1986). As mentioned earlier in Section 5, published thesauri, such as Roget’s and Macquarie, divide
the vocabulary into about a thousand categories, which may be interpreted as coarse senses. Each
category has a head word that best captures the meaning of the category. The word choice question
for a target term is automatically generated by selecting the following four alternatives (choices):
the head word of the thesaurus category pertaining to the target term (the correct answer); and
three other head words of randomly selected categories (the distractors). The four alternatives are
presented to the annotator in random order. We generated a separate HIT (and a separate word
choice question) for every sense of the target. We created Mechanical Turk HITs for each of the
terms (n-gram–sense pairs) speciﬁed in Table 1. Each HIT has a set of questions, all of which are to
be answered by the same person. As mentioned before, we requested ﬁve independent assignments
(annotations) for each HIT.
The phrasing of questions in any survey can have a signiﬁcant impact on the results. With our

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 Computational Intelligence
questions we hoped to be clear and brief, so that diﬀerent annotators do not misinterpret what was
being asked of them. In order to determine the more suitable way to formulate the questions, we
performed two separate annotations on a smaller pilot set of 2100 terms. One, in which we asked
if a word is associated with a certain emotion, and another independent set of annotations where
we asked whether a word evokes a certain emotion. We found that the annotators agreed with each
other much more in the associated case than in the evokes case. (Details are in Section 10.3 ahead.)
Therefore all subsequent annotations were done with associated. All results, except those presented
in Section 10.3, are for the associated annotations.
Below is a complete example HIT for the target wordstartle. Note that all questions are multiple-
choice questions, and the Turkers could select exactly one option for each question. The survey was
approved by the ethics committee at the National Research Council Canada.
Title: Emotions associated with words
Keywords: emotion, English, sentiment, word association, word meaning
Reward per HIT: $0.04
Directions:
1. This survey will be used to better understand emotions. Your input is much appreciated.
2. If any of the questions in a HIT are unanswered, then the assignment is no longer useful to
us and we will be unable to pay for the assignment.
3. Please return/skip HIT if you do not know the meaning of the word.
4. Attempt HITS only if you are a native speaker of English, or very ﬂuent in English.
5. Certain “check questions” will be used to make sure the annotation is responsible and
reasonable. Assignments that fail these tests will be rejected. If an annotator fails too many of
these check questions, then it will be assumed that the annotator is not following instructions
3 and/or 4 above, and ALL of the annotator’s assignments will be rejected.
6. We hate to reject assignments, but we must at times, to be fair to those who answer the
survey with diligence and responsibility. In the past we have approved completed assignments
by more than 95% of the Turkers. If you are unsure about your answers and this is the ﬁrst
time that you are answering an emotion survey posted by us, then we recommend that you
NOT do a huge number of HITs right away. Once your initial HITS are approved, you gain
conﬁdence in your answers and in us.
7. We will approve HITs about once a week. Expected date all the assignments will be approved:
April 14, 2010.
8. Conﬁdentiality notice: Your responses are conﬁdential. Any publications based on these
responses will not include your speciﬁc responses, but rather aggregate information from
many individuals. We will not ask any information that can be used to identify who you are.
9. Word meanings: Some words have more than one meaning, and the diﬀerent meanings may
be associated with diﬀerent emotions. For each HIT, Question 1 (Q1) will guide you to the
intended meaning. You may encounter multiple HITs for the same target term, but they will
correspond to diﬀerent meanings of the target word, and they will have diﬀerent guiding
questions.
Prompt word: startle
Q1. Which word is closest in meaning (most related) to startle?
• automobile
• shake
• honesty
• entertain
Q2. How positive (good, praising) is the word startle?

--- PAGE 11 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 11
• startle is not positive
• startle is weakly positive
• startle is moderately positive
• startle is strongly positive
Q3. How negative (bad, criticizing) is the word startle?
• startle is not negative
• startle is weakly negative
• startle is moderately negative
• startle is strongly negative
Q4. How much is startle associated with the emotion joy? (For example, happy and fun are
strongly associated with joy.)
• startle is not associated with joy
• startle is weakly associated with joy
• startle is moderately associated with joy
• startle is strongly associated with joy
Q5. How much is startle associated with the emotion sadness? (For example, failure and heart-
break are strongly associated with sadness.)
• startle is not associated with sadness
• startle is weakly associated with sadness
• startle is moderately associated with sadness
• startle is strongly associated with sadness
Q6. How much is startle associated with the emotion fear? (For example, horror and scary are
strongly associated with fear.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q7. How much is startle associated with the emotion anger? (For example, rage and shouting
are strongly associated with anger.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q8. How much is startle associated with the emotion trust? (For example, faith and integrity
are strongly associated with trust.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q9. How much is startle associated with the emotion disgust? (For example, gross and cruelty
are strongly associated with disgust.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q10. How much isstartle associated with the emotion surprise? (For example,startle and sudden
are strongly associated with surprise.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q11. How much is startle associated with the emotion anticipation? (For example, expect and
eager are strongly associated with anticipation.)
• Similar choices as in 4 and 5 above
Q12. Is startle an emotion? (For example: love is an emotion; shark is associated with fear (an
emotion), but shark is not an emotion.)
• No, startle is not an emotion
• Yes, startle is an emotion

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 Computational Intelligence
9. ANNOTATION STATISTICS AND POST-PROCESSING
We conducted annotations in two batches, starting ﬁrst with a pilot set of about 2100 terms,
which was annotated in about a week. The second batch of about 8000 terms (HITs) was annotated
in about two weeks. Notice that the amount of time taken is not linearly proportional to the number
of HITs. We speculate that as one builds a history of tasks and payment, more Turkers do subsequent
tasks. Also, if there are a large number of HITs, then probably more people ﬁnd it worth the eﬀort
to understand and become comfortable at doing the task. Each HIT had a compensation of $0.04
(4 cents) and the Turkers spent about a minute on average to answer the questions in a HIT. This
resulted in an hourly pay of about $2.40.
Once the assignments were collected, we used automatic scripts to validate the annotations.
Some assignments were discarded because they failed certain tests (described below). A subset of
the discarded assignments were oﬃcially rejected (the Turkers were not paid for these assignments)
because instructions were not followed. About 2,666 of the 50,850 (10,170 × 5) assignments included
at least one unanswered question. These assignments were discarded and rejected. Even though
distractors for Q1 were chosen at random, every now and then a distractor may come too close to
the meaning of the target term, resulting in a bad word choice question. For 1045 terms, three or
more annotators gave an answer diﬀerent from the one generated automatically from the thesaurus.
These questions were marked as bad questions and discarded. All corresponding assignments (5,225
in total) were discarded. Turkers were paid in full for these assignments regardless of their answer
to Q1.
More than 95% of the remaining assignments had the correct answer for the word choice question.
This was a welcome result, showing that most of the annotations were done in an appropriate manner.
We discarded all assignments that had the wrong answer for the word choice question. If an annotator
obtained an overall score that is less than 66.67% on the word choice questions (that is, got more than
one out of three wrong), then we assumed that, contrary to instructions, the annotator attempted
to answer HITs for words that were unfamiliar. We discarded and rejected all assignments by such
annotators (not merely the assignments for which they got the word choice question wrong).
For each of the annotators, we calculated the maximum likelihood probability with which the
annotator agrees with the majority on the emotion questions. We calculated the mean of these
probabilities and the standard deviation. Consistent with standard practices in identifying outliers,
we discarded annotations by Turkers who were more than two standard deviations away from the
mean (annotations by 111 Turkers).
After this post-processing, 8,883 of the initial 10,170 terms remained, each with three or more
valid assignments. We will refer to this set of assignments as the master set. We created the word–
emotion association lexicon from this master set, containing 38,726 assignments from about 2,216
Turkers who attempted 1 to 2,000 assignments each. About 300 of them provided 20 or more
assignments each (more than 33,000 assignments in all). The master set has, on average, about
4.4 assignments for each of the 8,883 target terms. (See Table 2 for more details.) The total cost
of the annotation was about US$2,100. This includes fees that Amazon charges (about 13% of the
amount paid to the Turkers) as well as the cost for the dual annotation of the pilot set with both
evokes and associated. 10
10. ANALYSIS OF EMOTION ANNOTATIONS
The diﬀerent emotion annotations for a target term were consolidated by determining the
majority class of emotion intensities. For a given term–emotion pair, the majority class is that
intensity level that is chosen most often by the Turkers to represent the degree of emotion evoked
by the word. Ties are broken by choosing the stronger intensity level. Table 3 lists the percentage of
8,883 target terms assigned a majority class of no, weak, moderate, and strong emotion. For example,
it tells us that 5% of the target terms strongly evoke joy. The table also presents averages of the
numbers in each column (micro-averages). The last row lists the percentage of target terms that
10We will upload HITs of discarded assignments on Mechanical Turk for another round of annotations.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 13
Table 2. Break down of target terms into various categories. Initial refers to terms chosen
for annotation. Master refers to terms for which three or more valid assignments were obtained
using Mechanical Turk. MQ stands for Macquarie Thesaurus, GI for General Inquirer, and WAL for
WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon.
# of terms Annotations
EmoLex Initial Master per word
EmoLex-Uni:
Unigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 200 190 4.4
adverbs 200 187 4.5
nouns 200 178 4.5
verbs 200 195 4.4
EmoLex-Bi:
Bigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 200 162 4.4
adverbs 187 171 4.3
nouns 200 185 4.5
verbs 200 178 4.4
EmoLex-GI:
Terms from General Inquirer
negative terms 2119 1837 4.4
neutral terms 4226 3653 4.4
positive terms 1787 1541 4.4
EmoLex-WAL:
Terms from WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon
anger terms 165 160 4.5
disgust terms 37 34 4.4
fear terms 100 89 4.4
joy terms 165 149 4.5
sadness terms 120 112 4.5
surprise terms 53 51 4.4
Union 10170 8883 4.45
Table 3. Percentage of terms with majority class of no, weak, moderate, and strong emotion.
Intensity
Emotion no weak moderate strong
anger 81.6 8.5 5.1 4.5
anticipation 84.2 8.9 4.2 2.4
disgust 84.6 8.3 3.8 3.1
fear 79.6 10.3 5.6 4.3
joy 79.5 8.9 6.4 5.0
sadness 80.9 10.0 4.8 4.2
surprise 89.5 6.6 2.2 1.4
trust 81.9 7.9 5.9 4.1
micro-average 82.7 8.7 4.8 3.6
any emotion 35.6 21.2 20.5 22.5
evoke some emotion (any of the eight) at the various intensity levels. We calculated this using the
intensity level of the strongest emotion expressed by each target. Observe that 22.5% of the target
terms strongly evoke at least one of the eight basic emotions.

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 Computational Intelligence
Table 4. Percentage of terms, in each target set, that are emotive. Highest individual emotion
scores for EmoLex-WAL are shown in bold. The last column, any, shows the percentage of terms
associated with at least one of the eight emotions. Observe that WAL fear terms are marked most
as associate with fear, joy terms as associated with joy, and so on.
anger anticipn. disgust fear joy sadness surprise trust any
EmoLex 13 12 10 14 16 12 6 16 54
EmoLex-Uni:
Unigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 14 14 10 13 29 14 10 15 68
adverb 13 20 8 10 23 11 7 23 67
noun 7 18 3 7 16 6 3 24 46
verb 11 21 5 16 14 11 7 15 52
EmoLex-Bi:
Bigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 12 25 8 14 30 15 8 16 66
adverbs 6 23 1 7 19 3 9 29 54
nouns 9 23 6 14 20 9 7 29 58
verbs 8 25 5 7 21 6 3 27 60
EmoLex-GI:
Terms from General Inquirer
negative terms 36 4 29 34 0 33 8 2 67
neutral terms 4 11 3 8 10 4 5 13 36
positive terms 1 13 0 2 40 1 4 33 62
EmoLex-WAL:
Terms from WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon
anger terms 83 1 53 18 0 16 0 0 90
disgust terms 44 0 94 14 0 2 0 0 94
fear terms 17 17 19 74 1 20 15 3 89
joy terms 2 14 0 2 78 2 7 28 91
sadness terms 9 0 13 13 0 94 0 0 96
surprise terms 2 6 4 8 42 6 66 6 88
Even though we asked Turkers to annotate emotions at four levels of intensity, practical NLP
applications often require only two levels—associated with a given emotion (we will refer to these
terms as being emotive) or not associated with the emotion (we will refer to these terms as being
non-emotive). For each target term–emotion pair, we convert the four-level annotations into two-level
annotations by placing all no- and weak-intensity assignments in the non-emotive bin, all moderate-
and strong-intensity assignments in the emotive bin, and then choosing the bin with the majority
assignments. Table 4 shows the percentage of terms associated with the diﬀerent emotions. The last
column, any, shows the percentage of terms associated with at least one of the eight emotions.
Analysis of Q12 revealed that 9.3% of the 8,883 target terms (826 terms) were considered not
merely to be associated with certain emotions, but also to refer directly to emotions.
10.1. Discussion
Table 4 shows that a sizable percentage of nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are emotive.
Trust (16%), and joy (16%) are the most common emotions associated with terms. Among the four
parts of speech, adjectives (68%) and adverbs (67%) are most often associated with emotions and
this is not surprising considering that they are used to qualify nouns and verbs, respectively. Nouns
are more commonly associated with trust (16%), whereas adjectives are more commonly associated
with joy (29%).
The EmoLex-WAL rows are particularly interesting because they serve to determine how much
the Turker annotations match annotations in the Wordnet Aﬀect Lexicon (WAL). The most common
Turker-determined emotion for each of these rows is marked in bold. Observe that WAL anger terms
are mostly marked as associated with anger, joy terms as associated with joy, and so on. Here is the

--- PAGE 15 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 15
Table 5. Agreement at four intensity levels of emotion (no, weak, moderate, and strong):
Percentage of terms for which the majority class size was 2, 3, 4, and 5. Note that, given ﬁve
annotators and four levels, the majority class size must be between two and ﬁve.
Majority class size
Emotion = two = three = four = ﬁve ⩾ three ⩾ four
anger 13.7 21.7 25.7 38.7 86.1 64.4
anticipation 19.2 31.7 28.3 20.7 80.7 49.0
disgust 13.8 20.7 23.8 41.5 86.0 65.3
fear 16.7 27.7 25.6 29.9 83.2 55.5
joy 16.1 24.3 21.9 37.5 83.7 59.4
sadness 14.3 23.8 25.9 35.7 85.4 61.6
surprise 11.8 25.3 32.2 30.6 88.1 62.8
trust 18.8 27.4 27.7 25.9 81.0 53.6
micro-average 15.6 25.3 26.4 32.6 84.3 59.0
complete list of terms that are marked as anger terms in WAL, but were not marked as anger terms by
the Turkers: baﬄed, exacerbate, gravel, pesky, and pestering. One can see that indeed many of these
terms are not truly associated with anger. We also observed that the Turkers marked some terms
as being associated with both anger and joy. The complete list includes: adjourn, credit card, ﬁnd
out, gloat, spontaneously, and surprised. One can see how many of these words are indeed associated
with both anger and joy. The EmoLex-WAL rows also indicate which emotions tend to be jointly
associated to a term. Observe that anger terms tend also to be associated with disgust. Similarly,
many joy terms are also associated with trust. The surprise terms in WAL are largely also associated
with joy.
The EmoLex-GI rows rightly show that words marked as negative in the General Inquirer
are mostly associated with negative emotions (anger, fear, disgust, and sadness). Observe that the
percentages for trust and joy are much lower. On the other hand, positive words are associated with
anticipation, joy, and trust.
10.2. Agreement
In order to analyze how often the annotators agreed with each other, for each term–emotion
pair, we calculated the percentage of times the majority class has size 5 (all Turkers agree), size 4 (all
but one agree), size 3, and size 2. Table 5 presents these agreement values. Observe that for almost
60% of the terms, at least four annotators agree with each other (see bottom right corner of Table 5).
Since many NLP systems may rely only on two intensity values (emotive or non-emotive), we also
calculate agreement at that level (Table 6). For more than 60% of the terms, all ﬁve annotators
agree with each other, and for almost 85% of the terms, at least four annotators agree (see bottom
right corner of Table 6). These agreements are despite the somewhat subjective nature of word–
emotion associations, and despite the absence of any control over the educational background of
the annotators. We provide agreement values along with each of the termemotion pairs so that
downstream applications can selectively use the lexicon.
Cohen’s κ (Cohen, 1960) is a widely used measure for inter-annotator agreement. It corrects
observed agreement for chance agreement by using the distribution of classes chosen by each of the
annotators. However, it is appropriate only when the same judges annotate all the instances (Fleiss,
1971). In Mechanical Turk, annotators are given the freedom to annotate as many terms as they
wish, and many annotate only a small number of terms (the long tail of the zipﬁan distribution).
Thus the judges do not annotate all of the instances, and further, one cannot reliably estimate the
distribution of classes chosen by each judge when they annotate only a small number of instances.
Scott’s Π (Scott, 1955) calculates chance agreement by determining the distribution each of the
categories (regardless of who the annotator is). This is more appropriate for our data, but it applies
only to scenarios with exactly two annotators. Fleiss (1971) proposed a generalization of Scott’s Π
for when there are more than two annotators, which he called κ even though Fleiss’s κ is more like
Scott’s Π than Cohen’s κ. All subsequent mentions of κ in this paper will refer to Fleiss’s κ unless

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 Computational Intelligence
Table 6. Agreement at two intensity levels of emotion (emotive and non-emotive): Percentage
of terms for which the majority class size was 3, 4, and 5. Note that, given ﬁve annotators and two
levels, the majority class size must be between three and ﬁve.
Majority class size
Emotion = three = four = ﬁve ⩾ four
anger 13.2 19.4 67.2 86.6
anticipation 18.8 32.6 48.4 81.0
disgust 13.4 18.4 68.1 86.5
fear 15.3 24.8 59.7 84.5
joy 16.2 22.6 61.0 83.6
sadness 12.8 20.2 66.9 87.1
surprise 10.9 22.8 66.2 89.0
trust 20.3 28.8 50.7 79.5
micro-average 15.1 23.7 61.0 84.7
Table 7. Segments of Fleiss κ values and their interpretations (Landis and Koch, 1977).
Fleiss’s κ Interpretation
< 0 poor agreement
0.00 – 0.20 slight agreement
0.21 - 0.40 fair agreement
0.41 - 0.60 moderate agreement
0.61 - 0.80 substantial agreement
0.81 - 1.00 almost perfect agreement
Table 8. Agreement at two intensity levels of emotion (emotive and non-emotive): Fleiss’s κ,
and its interpretation.
Emotion Fleiss’s κ Interpretation
anger 0.39 fair agreement
anticipation 0.14 slight agreement
disgust 0.31 fair agreement
fear 0.32 fair agreement
joy 0.36 fair agreement
sadness 0.39 fair agreement
surprise 0.18 slight agreement
trust 0.24 fair agreement
micro-average 0.29 fair agreement
explicitly stated otherwise. Landis and Koch (1977) provided Table 7 to interpret the κ values.
Table 8 lists the κ values for the Mechanical Turk emotion annotations.
The κ values show that for six of the eight emotions the Turkers have fair agreement, and for
anticipation and trust there is only slight agreement. The κ values for anger and sadness are the
highest. The average κ value for the eight emotions is 0.29, and it implies fair agreement. Below are
some reasons why agreement values are much lower than certain other tasks, for example, part of
speech tagging:
• The target word is presented out of context. We expect higher agreement if we provided words
in particular contexts, but words can occur in innumerable contexts, and annotating too many
instances of the same word is costly. By providing the word choice question, we bias the Turker
towards a particular sense of the target word, and aim to obtain the prior probability of the word
sense’s emotion association.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 17
Table 9. Evokes versus associated: Agreement at two intensity levels of emotion (emotive and
non-emotive). Percentage of terms in the pilot set for which the majority class size was 5.
Majority class size ﬁve
Emotion evokes associated
anger 61.6 68.2
anticipation 34.8 49.6
disgust 65.4 66.4
fear 62.0 59.4
joy 54.6 62.3
sadness 66.7 65.3
surprise 54.0 67.3
trust 47.3 49.8
micro-average 55.8 61.0
• Words are associated with emotions to diﬀerent degrees, and there are no clear classes correspond-
ing to diﬀerent levels of association. Since we ask people to place term-emotion associations in four
speciﬁc bins, more people disagree for term–emotion pairs whose degree of association is closer to
the boundaries, than for other term–emotion pairs.
• Holsti (1969), Brennan and Prediger (1981), Perreault and Leigh (1989), and others consider theκ
values (both Fleiss’s and Cohen’s) to be conservative, especially when one category is much more
prevalent than the other. In our data, the “not associated with emotion” category is much more
prevalent than the “associated with emotion” category, so theseκ values might be underestimates
of the true agreement.
Nonetheless, as mentioned earlier, when using the lexicon in downstream applications, one may
employ suitable strategies such as choosing instances that have high agreement scores, averaging
information from many words, and using contextual information in addition to information obtained
form the lexicon.
10.3. Evokes versus Associated
As alluded to earlier, we performed two separate sets of annotations on the pilot set: one where
we asked if a word evokes a certain emotion, and another where we asked if a word is associated with
a certain emotion. Table 9 lists the the percentage of times all ﬁve annotators agreed with each other
on the classiﬁcation of a term as emotive, for the two scenarios. Observe that the agreement numbers
are markedly higher with associated than with evokes for anger, anticipation, joy, and surprise. In
case of fear and sadness, the agreement is only slightly better with evokes, whereas for trust and
disgust the agreement is slightly better with associated. Overall, associated leads to an increase in
agreement by more than 5 percentage points over evokes. Therefore all subsequent annotations were
performed with associated only. (All results shown in this paper, except for those in Table 9, are for
associated.)
We speculate that to answer which emotions are evoked by a term, people sometimes bring in
their own varied personal experiences, and so we see relatively more disagreement than when we ask
what emotions are associated with a term. In the latter case, people may be answering what is more
widely accepted rather than their own personal perspective. Further investigation on the diﬀerences
between evoke and associated, and why there is a marked diﬀerence in agreements for some emotions
and not so much for others, is left as future work.
11. ANALYSIS OF POLARITY ANNOTATIONS
We consolidate the polarity annotations in the same manner as for emotion annotations. Table 10
lists the percentage of 8,883 target terms assigned a majority class of no, weak, moderate, and strong
polarity. It states, for example, that 15.6% of the target terms are strongly negative. The last row

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 Computational Intelligence
Table 10. Percentage of terms given majority class of no, weak, moderate, and strong polarity.
Intensity
Polarity no weak moderate strong
negative 64.3 9.1 10.8 15.6
positive 61.9 9.8 13.7 14.4
polarity average 63.1 9.5 12.3 15.0
either polarity 29.9 15.4 24.3 30.1
Table 11. Percentage of terms, in each target set, that are evaluative. The highest scores for
EmoLex-GI positives and negatives are shown bold. Observe that the positive GI terms are marked
mostly as positively evaluative and the negative terms are marked mostly as negatively evaluative.
negative positive either
EmoLex 30 35 65
EmoLex-Uni:
Unigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 32 48 79
adverbs 26 55 80
nouns 8 39 46
verbs 26 37 63
EmoLex-Bi:
Bigrams from Macquarie Thesaurus
adjectives 30 47 77
adverbs 11 42 52
nouns 14 45 57
verbs 14 48 60
EmoLex-GI:
Terms from General Inquirer
negative terms 83 1 85
neutral terms 12 30 41
positive terms 2 82 84
EmoLex-WAL:
Terms from WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon
anger terms 96 1 97
disgust terms 97 0 97
fear terms 85 1 86
joy terms 4 93 97
sadness terms 91 4 95
surprise terms 26 57 80
in the table lists the percentage of target terms that have some polarity (positive or negative) at
the various intensity levels. Observe that 30.1% of the target terms are either strongly positive or
strongly negative.
Just as in the case for emotions, practical NLP applications often require only two levels of
polarity—having particular polarity ( evaluative) or not ( non-evaluative). For each target term–
emotion pair, we convert the four-level semantic orientation annotations into two-level ones, just
as we did for the emotions. Table 11 shows how many terms overall and within each category are
positively and negatively evaluative.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 19
Table 12. Agreement at four intensity levels of polarity (no, weak, moderate, and strong):
Percentage of terms for which the majority class size was 2, 3, 4, and 5.
Majority class size
Polarity = two = three = four = ﬁve ⩾ three ⩾ four
negative 12.8 27.3 27.2 32.5 87.0 59.7
positive 23.5 28.5 18.0 29.8 76.3 47.8
micro-average 18.2 27.9 22.6 31.2 81.7 53.8
Table 13. Agreement at two intensity levels of polarity (evaluative and non-evaluative):
Percentage of terms for which the majority class size was 3, 4, and 5.
Majority class size
Polarity three four ﬁve ⩾ four
negative 11.5 22.3 66.1 88.4
positive 24.2 26.3 49.3 75.6
micro-average 17.9 24.3 57.7 82.0
11.1. Discussion
Observe in Table 11 that, across the board, a sizable number of terms are evaluative with respect
to some semantic orientation. Unigram nouns have a markedly lower proportion of negative terms,
and a much higher proportion of positive terms. It may be argued that the default polarity of noun
concepts is neutral or positive, and that usually it takes a negative adjective to make the phrase
negative.
The EmoLex-GI rows in the two tables show that words marked as having a negative polarity in
the General Inquirer are mostly marked as negative by the Turkers. And similarly, the positives in
GI are annotated as positive. Observe that the Turkers mark 12% of the GI neutral terms as negative
and 30% of the GI neutral terms as positive. This may be because the boundary between positive
and neutral terms is more fuzzy than between negative and neutral terms. The EmoLex-WAL rows
show that anger, disgust, fear, and sadness terms tend not to have a positive polarity and are mostly
negative. In contrast, and expectedly, the joy terms are positive. The surprise terms are more than
twice as likely to be positive than negative.
11.2. Agreement
For each term–polarity pair, we calculated the percentage of times the majority class has size 5
(all Turkers agree), size 4 (all but one agree), size 3, and size 2. Table 12 presents these agreement
values. For more than 50% of the terms, at least four annotators agree with each other (see bottom
right corner of Table 12). Table 13 gives agreement values at the two-intensity level. For more than
55% of the terms, all ﬁve annotators agree with each other, and for more than 80% of the terms, at
least four annotators agree (see bottom right corner of Table 13). Table 14 lists the Fleiss κ values
for the polarity annotations. They are interpreted based on the segments provided by Landis and
Koch (1977) (listed earlier in Table 7). Observe that annotations for negative polarity have markedly
higher agreement than annotations for positive polarity. This too may be because of the somewhat
more fuzzy boundary between positive and neutral, than between negative and neutral.
12. CONCLUSIONS
Emotion detection and generation have a number of practical applications including managing
customer relations, human computer interaction, information retrieval, more natural text-to-speech
systems, and in social and literary analysis. However, only a small number of limited-coverage
emotion resources exist, and that too only for English. In this paper we show how the combined
strength and wisdom of the crowds can be used to generate a large term–emotion association lexicon

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 Computational Intelligence
Table 14. Agreement at two intensity levels of polarity (evaluative and non-evaluative):
Fleiss’s κ, and its interpretation.
Polarity Fleiss’s κ Interpretation
negative 0.62 substantial agreement
positive 0.45 moderate agreement
micro-average 0.54 moderate agreement
quickly and inexpensively. This lexicon, EmoLex, has entries for more than 10,000 word–sense pairs.
Each entry lists the association of the a word–sense pair with 8 basic emotions. We used Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk as the crowdsourcing platform.
We outlined various challenges associated with crowdsourcing the creation of an emotion lexicon
(many of which apply to other language annotation tasks too), and presented various solutions to
address those challenges. Notably, we used automatically generated word choice questions to detect
and reject erroneous annotations and to reject all annotations by unqualiﬁed Turkers and those who
indulge in malicious data entry. The word choice question is also an eﬀective and intuitive way of
conveying the sense for which emotion annotations are being requested.
We compared a subset of our lexicon with existing gold standard data to show that the an-
notations obtained are indeed of high quality. We identiﬁed which emotions tend to be evoked
simultaneously by the same term, and also how frequent the emotion associations are in high-
frequency words. We also compiled a list of 826 terms that are not merely associated with emotions,
but also refer directly to emotions. All of the 10,170 terms in the lexicon are also annotated with
whether they have a positive, negative, or neutral semantic orientation.
13. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Our future work includes expanding the coverage of the lexicon even further, creating similar
lexicons in other languages, identifying cross-cultural and cross-language diﬀerences in emotion
associations, and using the lexicon in various emotion detection applications such as those listed
in Section 2. Mohammad and Yang (2011) describe some of these eﬀorts, in which we use the
Roget’s Thesaurus as the source of target terms, and create an emotion lexicon with entries for
more than 24,000 word–sense pairs (covering about 14,000 unique word-types). We will use this
manually created emotion lexicon to evaluate automatically generated lexicons, such as the polarity
lexicons by Turney and Littman (2003) and Mohammad et al. (2009). We will explore the variance
in emotion evoked by near-synonyms, and also how common it is for words with many meanings to
evoke diﬀerent emotions in diﬀerent senses.
We are interested in further improving the annotation process by applying Maximum Diﬀerence
Scaling (or MaxDiﬀ) (Louviere, 1991; Louviere and Finn, 1992). In MaxDiﬀ, instead of asking
annotators for a score representing how strongly an item is associated with a certain category,
the annotator is presented with four or ﬁve items at a time and asked which item is most associated
with the category and which one the least. The approach forces annotators to compare items
directly, which leads to better annotations (Louviere and Finn, 1992; Cohen and Associates, 2003),
which we hope will translate into higher inter-annotator agreements. Further, if A,B,C, and D
are the four items in a set, by asking only the most and least questions, we will know ﬁve out
of the six inequalities. For example, if A is the maximum, and D is the least, then we know that
A>B,A>C,A>D,B >D,C >D . This makes the annotations signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than
just providing pairs of items and asking which is more associated with a category. Hierarchical Bayes
estimation can then be used to convert these MaxDiﬀ judgments into scores (from 0 to 10 say) and
to rank all the items in order of association with the category.
Many of the challenges associated with polarity analysis have correspondence in emotion analysis
too. For example, using context information in addition to prior probability of a word’s polarity or
emotion association, to determine the true emotional impact of a word in a particular occurrence.
Our emotion annotations are at word-sense level, yet accurate word sense disambiguation systems
must be employed to make full use of this information. For example, Rentoumi et al. (2009) show

--- PAGE 21 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 21
that word sense disambiguation improves detection of polarity of sentences. There is also a need for
algorithms to identify who is experiencing an emotion, and determine what or who is evoking that
emotion. Further, given a sentence or a paragraph, the writer, the reader, and the entities mentioned
in the text may all have diﬀerent emotions associated with them. Yet another challenge is how to
handle negation of emotions. For example, not sad does not usually mean happy, whereas not happy
can often mean sad.
Finally, emotion detection can be used as a tool for social and literary analysis. For example,
how have books portrayed diﬀerent entities over time? Does the co-occurrence of fear words with
entities (for example, cigarette, or homosexual, or nuclear energy) reﬂect the feelings of society as a
whole towards these entities? What is the distribution of diﬀerent emotion words in novels and plays?
How has this distribution changed over time, and across diﬀerent genres? Eﬀective emotion analysis
can help identify trends and lead to a better understanding of humanity’s changing perception of
the world around it.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the National Research Council Canada (NRC). We are grateful
to the reviewers for their thoughtful comments. Thanks to Joel Martin, Diana Inkpen, and Diman
Ghazi for discussions and encouragement. Thanks to Norm Vinson and the Ethics Committee at
NRC for examining, guiding, and approving the survey. And last but not least, thanks to the more
than 2000 anonymous annotators who answered the emotion survey with diligence and care.
REFERENCES
Adamic, L. A., Zhang, J., Bakshy, E., and Ackerman, M. S. (2008). Knowledge sharing and yahoo
answers: everyone knows something. InProceeding of the 17th international conference on World
Wide Web , WWW ’08, pages 665–674, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Alm, C. O., Roth, D., and Sproat, R. (2005). Emotions from text: Machine learning for text-based
emotion prediction. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Human Language Technology
/ Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP-2005) , pages 579–586,
Vancouver, Canada.
Aman, S. and Szpakowicz, S. (2007). Identifying expressions of emotion in text. In V. Matouˇ sek
and P. Mautner, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue, volume 4629 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 196–205. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Aristotle (1913). Physiognomonica. In W. D. Ross, editor, The Works of Aristotle , pages 805–813.
Oxford, England: Clarendon. Translated by T. Loveday and E. S. Forster.
Bellegarda, J. (2010). Emotion analysis using latent aﬀective folding and embedding. In Proceedings
of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation
of Emotion in Text , Los Angeles, California.
Bernard, J., editor (1986). The Macquarie Thesaurus . Macquarie Library, Sydney, Australia.
Boucouvalas, A. C. (2002). Real time text-to-emotion engine for expressive internet communication.
Emerging Communication: Studies on New Technologies and Practices in Communication , 5,
305–318.
Bougie, J. R. G., Pieters, R., and Zeelenberg, M. (2003). Angry customers don’t come back, they
get back: The experience and behavioral implications of anger and dissatisfaction in services.
Open access publications from tilburg university, Tilburg University.
Bradley, M. and Lang, P. (1999). Aﬀective norms for english words (anew): Instruction manual
and aﬀective ratings. In Technical Report, C-1, The Center for Research in Psychophysiology,
University of Florida.
Brants, T. and Franz, A. (2006). Web 1t 5-gram version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium .
Breazeal, C. and Brooks, R. (2004). Robot emotions: A functional perspective. In Who Needs
Emotions. Oxford University Press.
Brennan, R. L. and Prediger, D. J. (1981). Coeﬃcient Kappa: Some Uses, Misuses, and Alternatives.
Educational and Psychological Measurement , 41(3), 687–699.

--- PAGE 22 ---
22 Computational Intelligence
Callison-Burch, C. (2009). Fast, cheap and creative: Evaluating translation quality using amazon’s
mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-2009), pages 286–295, Singapore.
Cohen, J. (1960). A Coeﬃcient of Agreement for Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1), 37–46.
Cohen, S. H. and Associates, S. . (2003). Maximum diﬀerence scaling: Improved measures of
importance and preference for segmentation. In Sawtooth Software Conference Proceedings,
Sawtooth Software, Inc. 530 W. Fir St , pages 61–74.
Dabholkar, P. A., Shepherd, C. D., and Thorpe, D. I. (2000). A comprehensive framework for service
quality: an investigation of critical conceptual and measurement issues through a longitudinal
study. Journal of Retailing , 76(2), 139–173.
Darwin, C. (1872). The Expressions of the Emotions in Man and Animals . John Murray.
Davenport, T. H., Harris, J. G., and Kohli, A. K. (2001). How do they know their customers so
well? 42(2), 63–73.
D´ ıaz, A. B. C. and Ruz, F. J. M. (2002). The consumers reaction to delays in service. International
Journal of Service Industry Management , 13(2), 118–140.
Dub´ e, L. and Maute, M. (1996). The antecedents of brand switching, brand loyalty and verbal
responses to service failure. Advances in Services Marketing and Management , 5, 127–151.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion , 6(3), 169–200.
Ekman, P. (2005). Emotion in the Human Face . Oxford University Press.
Ekman, P. and Friesen, W. V. (2003). Unmasking the Face: A Guide to Recognizing Emotions From
Facial Expressions. Malor Books.
Elfenbein, H. A. and Ambady, N. (1994). Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial
expression? a review of the cross-cultural studies. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 102–141.
Elliott, C. (1992). The aﬀective reasoner: A process model of emotions in a multi-agent system .
Ph.D. thesis, Institute for the Learning Sciences, Northwestern University.
Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulletin,
76(5), 378–382.
Folkes, V. S., Koletsky, S., and Graham, J. L. (1987). A ﬁeld study of causal inferences and consumer
reaction: The view from the airport. Journal of Consumer Research: An Interdisciplinary
Quarterly, 13(4), 534–39.
Francisco, V. and Gerv´ as, P. (2006). Automated mark up of aﬀective information in english texts. In
P. Sojka, I. Kopecek, and K. Pala, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue , volume 4188 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 375–382. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Genereux, M. and Evans, R. P. (2006). Distinguishing aﬀective states in weblogs. In AAAI-2006
Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs , pages 27–29, Stanford,
California.
Goyal, A., Riloﬀ, E., Daume III, H., and Gilbert, N. (2010). Toward plot units: Automatic aﬀect state
analysis. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , Los Angeles, California.
Gross, J. J. (1998). The emerging ﬁeld of emotion regulation: An integrative review. Review of
General Psychology, 2(3), 271–299.
Guo, K., Hall, C., Hall, S., K., M., and Mills, D. (2007). Left gaze bias in human infants, rhesus
monkeys, and domestic dogs. Animal Cognition, 12, 409–418.
Harris, L. C. and Goode, M. M. H. (2004). The four levels of loyalty and the pivotal role of trust: a
study of online service dynamics. Journal of Retailing , 80(2), 139–158.
Hollinger, G., Georgiev, Y., Manfredi, A., Maxwell, B. A., Pezzementi, Z. A., and Mitchell, B. (2006).
Design of a social mobile robot using emotion-based decision mechanisms. In Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on , pages 3093–3098.
Holsti, O. R. (1969). Content analysis for the social sciences and humanities . Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Holzman, L. E. and Pottenger, W. M. (2003). Classiﬁcation of emotions in internet chat: An
application of machine learning using speech phonemes. Technical report, Leigh University.
Howe, J. and Robinson, M. (2006). Crowdsourcing: A deﬁnition. In Crowdsourcing: Tracking the
Rise of the Amateur . Weblog.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 23
James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? Mind, 9, 188–205.
John, D., Boucouvalas, A. C., and Xu, Z. (2006). Representing emotional momentum within
expressive internet communication. In Proceedings of the 24th IASTED international conference
on Internet and multimedia systems and applications , pages 183–188, Anaheim, CA. ACTA
Press.
Kalra, A. and Karahalios, K. (2005). Texttone: Expressing emotion through text. In M. F. Costabile
and F. Patern, editors, Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2005 , volume 3585 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 966–969. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Knautz, K., Siebenlist, T., and Stock, W. G. (2010). Memose: search engine for emotions in
multimedia documents. In Proceeding of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval , SIGIR ’10, pages 791–792, New York, NY.
ACM.
Kˇ ovecses, Z. (2003).Metaphor and Emotion: Language, Culture, and Body in Human Feeling (Studies
in Emotion and Social Interaction) . Cambridge University Press.
Landis, J. R. and Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1), 159–174.
Lazarus, R. S. (1984). On the primacy of cognition. American Psychologist, 39(2), 124–129.
Lazarus, R. S. (2000). The cognition-emotion debate: A bit of history. In M. Lewis and J. Haviland-
Jones, editors, Handbook of Cognition and Emotion , pages 1–20. New York: Guilford Press.
Lehrer, A. (1974). Semantic ﬁelds and lexical structure . North-Holland, American Elsevier,
Amsterdam, NY.
Litman, D. J. and Forbes-Riley, K. (2004). Predicting student emotions in computer-human tutoring
dialogues. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL ’04, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Liu, H., Lieberman, H., and Selker, T. (2003). A model of textual aﬀect sensing using real-world
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , IUI
’03, pages 125–132, New York, NY. ACM.
Louviere, J. J. (1991). Best-worst scaling: A model for the largest diﬀerence judgments. Technical
report, University of Alberta.
Louviere, J. J. and Finn, A. (1992). Determining the appropriate response to evidence of public
concern: The case of food safety. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing , 11(2), 12–25.
Ma, C., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. (2005). Emotion estimation and reasoning based on aﬀective
textual interaction. In J. Tao and R. W. Picard, editors, First International Conference on
Aﬀective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII-2005) , pages 622–628, Beijing, China.
Masson, J. M. (1996). When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of Animals . Delta.
Matykiewicz, P., Duch, W., and Pestian, J. P. (2009). Clustering semantic spaces of suicide notes
and newsgroups articles. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical
Natural Language Processing, BioNLP ’09, pages 179–184, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Maute, M. F. and Forrester, W. J. (1993). The structure and determinants of consumer complaint
intentions and behavior. Journal of Economic Psychology , 14(2), 219–247.
Mihalcea, R. and Liu, H. (2006). A corpus-based approach to ﬁnding happiness. In AAAI-2006
Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs , pages 139–144. AAAI
Press.
Mohammad, S. M. (2011a). Even the abstract have colour: Consensus in wordcolour associations.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Portland, OR, USA.
Mohammad, S. M. (2011b). From once upon a time to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in
novels and fairy tales. In Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Language Technology for
Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) , Portland, OR, USA.
Mohammad, S. M. and Turney, P. D. (2010). Emotions evoked by common words and phrases:
Using mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , LA,
California.
Mohammad, S. M. and Yang, T. W. (2011). Tracking sentiment in mail:

--- PAGE 24 ---
24 Computational Intelligence
how genders diﬀer on emotional axes. In Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Computa-
tional Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis (WASSA) , Portland, OR, USA.
Mohammad, S. M., Dunne, C., and Dorr, B. (2009). Generating high-coverage semantic orientation
lexicons from overtly marked words and a thesaurus. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2009), pages 599–608, Singapore.
Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. (2009). Compositionality principle in recognition
of ﬁne-grained emotions from text. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-09) , pages 278–281, San Jose, California.
Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. (2010). Aﬀect analysis model: novel rule-based
approach to aﬀect sensing from text. Natural Language Engineering , 17(Part 1), 95–135.
Nowlis, V. and Nowlis, H. H. (2001). The description and analysis of mood. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 65(4), 345–355.
Oliver, R. L. (1997). Satisfaction a behavioral perspective on the consumer. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ortony, A. and Turner, T. J. (1990). What’s basic about basic emotions? Psychological Review, 97,
315–331.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., and Collins, A. (1988). The Cognitive Structure of Emotions . Cambridge
University Press.
Osgood, C. E. and Walker, E. G. (1959). Motivation and language behavior: A content analysis of
suicide notes. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 59(1), 58–67.
Pang, B. and Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval , 2(1–2), 1–135.
Parrot, W. (2001). Emotions in Social Psychology . Psychology Press.
Pearl, L. and Steyvers, M. (2010). Identifying emotions, intentions, and attitudes in text using a
game with a purpose. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , Los Angeles, California.
Perreault, W. D. and Leigh, L. E. (1989). Reliability of nominal data based on qualitative judgments.
Journal of Marketing Research , 26, 135–148.
Pestian, J. P., Matykiewicz, P., and Grupp-Phelan, J. (2008). Using natural language processing
to classify suicide notes. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical
Natural Language Processing , BioNLP ’08, pages 96–97, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Plutchik, R. (1962). The Emotions . New York: Random House.
Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. Emotion: Theory, research,
and experience, 1(3), 3–33.
Plutchik, R. (1985). On emotion: The chicken-and-egg problem revisited. Motivation and Emotion ,
9(2), 197–200.
Plutchik, R. (1994). The psychology and biology of emotion . New York: Harper Collins.
Rashid, R., Aitken, J., and Fels, D. (2006). Expressing emotions using animated text captions. In
K. Miesenberger, J. Klaus, W. Zagler, and A. Karshmer, editors, Computers Helping People
with Special Needs, volume 4061 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 24–31. Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg.
Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Turpeinen, M., Laarni, J., Salminen, M., and Kivikangas, M. (2006). Spatial
presence and emotions during video game playing: Does it matter with whom you play?
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 15(4), 381–392.
Read, J. (2004). Recognising aﬀect in text using pointwise-mutual information . Ph.D. thesis,
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex.
Reichheld, F. F. and Schefter, P. (2000). E-loyalty: your secret weapon on the web.Harvard Business
Review, pages 105–113.
Rentoumi, V., Giannakopoulos, G., Karkaletsis, V., and Vouros, G. A. (2009). Sentiment analysis
of ﬁgurative language using a word sense disambiguation approach. In Proceedings of the
International Conference RANLP-2009 , pages 370–375, Borovets, Bulgaria. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Richins, M. (1987). A multivariate analysis of responses to dissatisfaction. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science , 15, 24–31.
Richins, M. L. (1984). Word of mouth communication as negative information. Advances in

--- PAGE 25 ---
Crowdsourcing a Word–Emotion Association Lexicon 25
Consumer Research, 11, 697–702.
Russell, J. A. (1994). Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial expression? a review of
the cross-cultural studies. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 102–141.
Sautera, D. A., Eisner, F., Ekman, P., and Scott, S. K. (2010). Cross-cultural recognition of basic
emotions through nonverbal emotional vocalizations. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(6), 2408–2412.
Scherer, K. R. (1982). Emotion as a process: Function, origin and regulation. Social Science
Information, 21(4–5), 555–570.
Scherer, K. R. (1984). Emotion as a multicomponent process: a model and some cross-cultural data.
Review of Personality and Social Psychology , 5, 37–63.
Scott, W. A. (1955). Reliability of Content Analysis:. Public Opinion Quarterly , 19(3), 321–325.
Shankar, V., Urban, G. L., and Sultan, F. (2002). Online trust: a stakeholder perspective, concepts,
implications, and future directions. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 11(3–4),
325–344.
Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., and O’Connor, G. (1987). Emotion knowledge: Further
exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52, 1061–
1086.
Singh, J. (1988). Consumer complaint intentions and behavior: Deﬁnitional and taxonomical issues.
The Journal of Marketing , 52(1), 93–107.
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., and Ng, A. (2008). Cheap and fast - but is it good? Evaluating
nonexpert annotations for natural language tasks. InProceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2008) , pages 254–263, Waikiki, Hawaii.
Steunebrink, B. R. (2010). The Logical Structure of Emotions . Ph.D. thesis, Dutch Research School
for Information and Knowledge Systems.
Stewart, K. J. (2003). Trust transfer on the world wide web. Organization Science, 14, 5–17.
Stone, P., Dunphy, D. C., Smith, M. S., Ogilvie, D. M., and associates (1966). The General Inquirer:
A Computer Approach to Content Analysis . The MIT Press.
Strapparava, C. and Valitutti, A. (2004). Wordnet-Aﬀect: An aﬀective extension of WordNet. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2004), pages 1083–1086, Lisbon, Portugal.
Subasic, P. and Huettner, A. (2001). Aﬀect analysis of text using fuzzy semantic typing. IEEE
Transaction on Fuzzy Systems , 9(4), 483–496.
Turney, P. and Littman, M. (2003). Measuring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) , 21(4), 315–346.
Vel´ asquez, J. D. (1997). Modeling emotions and other motivations in synthetic agents. InProceedings
of the fourteenth national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and ninth conference on Innovative
applications of artiﬁcial intelligence , AAAI’97/IAAI’97, pages 10–15. AAAI Press.
Weiner, B. (1985). An Attributional Theory of Achievement Motivation and Emotion. Psychological
Review, 92(4), 548–73.
Wiebe, J. M. (1994). Tracking point of view in narrative.Computational Linguistics, 20(2), 233–287.
Zajonc, R. B. (1984). On the primacy of aﬀect. American Psychologist, 39(2), 117–123.
Zhe, X. and Boucouvalas, A. (2002). Text-to-Emotion Engine for Real Time Internet
CommunicationText-to-Emotion Engine for Real Time Internet Communication , pages 164–
168.