--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 50 (2014) 723–762 Submitted 12/13; published 08/14
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Svetlana Kiritchenko Svetlana.Kiritchenko@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Xiaodan Zhu Xiaodan.Zhu@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Saif M. Mohammad Saif.Mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
National Research Council Canada
1200 Montreal Rd., Ottawa, ON, Canada
Abstract
We describe a state-of-the-art sentiment analysis system that detects (a) the sentiment
of short informal textual messages such as tweets and SMS (message-level task) and (b)
the sentiment of a word or a phrase within a message (term-level task). The system is
based on a supervised statistical text classiﬁcation approach leveraging a variety of surface-
form, semantic, and sentiment features. The sentiment features are primarily derived from
novel high-coverage tweet-speciﬁc sentiment lexicons. These lexicons are automatically
generated from tweets with sentiment-word hashtags and from tweets with emoticons. To
adequately capture the sentiment of words in negated contexts, a separate sentiment lexicon
is generated for negated words.
The system ranked ﬁrst in the SemEval-2013 shared task ‘Sentiment Analysis in Twit-
ter’ (Task 2), obtaining an F-score of 69.02 in the message-level task and 88.93 in the
term-level task. Post-competition improvements boost the performance to an F-score of
70.45 (message-level task) and 89.50 (term-level task). The system also obtains state-of-
the-art performance on two additional datasets: the SemEval-2013 SMS test set and a
corpus of movie review excerpts. The ablation experiments demonstrate that the use of
the automatically generated lexicons results in performance gains of up to 6.5 absolute
percentage points.
1. Introduction
Sentiment Analysis involves determining the evaluative nature of a piece of text. For ex-
ample, a product review can express a positive, negative, or neutral sentiment (or polarity).
Automatically identifying sentiment expressed in text has a number of applications, in-
cluding tracking sentiment towards products, movies, politicians, etc., improving customer
relation models, detecting happiness and well-being, and improving automatic dialogue sys-
tems. Over the past decade, there has been a substantial growth in the use of microblogging
services such as Twitter and access to mobile phones world-wide. Thus, there is tremendous
interest in sentiment analysis of short informal texts, such as tweets and SMS messages,
across a variety of domains (e.g., commerce, health, military intelligence, and disaster man-
agement).
Short informal textual messages bring in new challenges to sentiment analysis. They
are limited in length, usually spanning one sentence or less. They tend to have many
misspellings, slang terms, and shortened forms of words. They also have special markers
such as hashtags that are used to facilitate search, but can also indicate a topic or sentiment.
This paper describes a state-of-the-art sentiment analysis system addressing two tasks:
(a) detecting the sentiment of short informal textual messages (message-level task) and
c⃝2014 National Research Council Canada. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
(b) detecting the sentiment of a word or a phrase within a message (term-level task).
The system is based on a supervised statistical text classiﬁcation approach leveraging a
variety of surface-form, semantic, and sentiment features. Given only limited amounts of
training data, statistical sentiment analysis systems often beneﬁt from the use of manually or
automatically built sentiment lexicons. Sentiment lexicons are lists of words (and phrases)
with prior associations to positive and negative sentiments. Some lexicons can additionally
provide a sentiment score for a term to indicate its strength of evaluative intensity. Higher
scores indicate greater intensity. For example, an entry great (positive, 1.2) states that
the word great has positive polarity with the sentiment score of 1.2. An entry acceptable
(positive, 0.1) speciﬁes that the word acceptable has positive polarity and its intensity is
lower than that of the word great.
In our sentiment analysis system, we utilize three freely available, manually created,
general-purpose sentiment lexicons. In addition, we generated two high-coverage tweet-
speciﬁc sentiment lexicons from about 2.5 million tweets using sentiment markers within
them. These lexicons automatically capture many peculiarities of the social media language
such as common intentional and unintentional misspellings (e.g., gr8, lovin, coul, holys**t),
elongations (e.g., yesssss, mmmmmmm, uugghh), and abbreviations (e.g., lmao, wtf ). They
also include words that are not usually considered to be expressing sentiment, but that are
often associated with positive/negative feelings (e.g., party, birthday, homework).
Sentiment lexicons provide knowledge on prior polarity (positive, negative, or neutral)
of a word, i.e., its polarity in most contexts. However, in a particular context this prior
polarity can change. One such obvious contextual sentiment modiﬁer is negation. In a
negated context, many words change their polarity or at least the evaluative intensity. For
example, the word good is often used to express positive attitude whereas the phrase not
good is clearly negative. A conventional way of addressing negation in sentiment analysis
is to reverse the polarity of a word, i.e. change a word’s sentiment score from s to−s
(Kennedy & Inkpen, 2005; Choi & Cardie, 2008). However, several studies have pointed
out the inadequacy of this solution (Kennedy & Inkpen, 2006; Taboada, Brooke, Toﬁloski,
Voll, & Stede, 2011). We will show through experiments in Section 4.3 that many positive
terms, though not all, tend to reverse their polarity when negated, whereas most negative
terms remain negative and only change their evaluative intensity. For example, the word
terrible conveys a strong negative sentiment whereas the phrase wasn’t terrible is mildly
negative. Also, the degree of the intensity shift varies from term to term for both posi-
tive and negative terms. To adequately capture the eﬀects of negation on diﬀerent terms,
we propose a corpus-based statistical approach to estimate sentiment scores of individual
terms in the presence of negation. We build two lexicons: one for words in negated contexts
(Negated Context Lexicon) and one for words in aﬃrmative (non-negated) contexts ( Aﬃr-
mative Context Lexicon ). Each word (or phrase) now has two scores, one in the Negated
Context Lexicon and one in the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon. When analyzing the sen-
timent of a textual message, we use scores from the Negated Context Lexicon for words
appearing in a negated context and scores from the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon for words
appearing in an aﬃrmative context.
Experiments are carried out to asses both, the performance of the overall sentiment
analysis system as well as the quality and value of the automatically created tweet-speciﬁc
lexicons. In the intrinsic evaluation of the lexicons, their entries are compared with the
724

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
entries of the manually created lexicons. Also, human annotators were asked to rank a
subset of lexicon entries by the degree of their association with positive or negative sentiment
and this ranking is compared with the ranking produced by an automatic lexicon. In
both experiments we observe high agreement between the automatic and manual sentiment
annotations.
The extrinsic evaluation is performed on two tasks: unsupervised and supervised sen-
timent analysis. On the supervised task, we assess the performance of the full sentiment
analysis system and examine the impact of the features derived from the automatic lexicons
on the overall performance. As a testbed, we use the datasets provided for the SemEval-
2013 competition on Sentiment Analysis in Twitter (Wilson, Kozareva, Nakov, Rosenthal,
Stoyanov, & Ritter, 2013).1 There were datasets provided for two tasks, message-level task
and term-level task, and two domains, tweets and SMS. However, the training data were
available only for tweets. Among 77 submissions from 44 teams, our system placed ﬁrst
in the competition in both tasks on the tweet test set, obtaining a macro-averaged F-score
of 69.02 in the message-level task and 88.93 in the term-level task. Post-competition im-
provements to the system boost the performance to an F-score of 70.45 (message-level task)
and 89.50 (term-level task). We also applied our classiﬁer on the SMS test set without
any further tuning. The classiﬁer obtained the ﬁrst position in identifying sentiment of
SMS messages (F-score of 68.46) and the second position in detecting the sentiment of
terms within SMS messages (F-score of 88.00; only 0.39 points behind the ﬁrst-ranked sys-
tem). With post-competition improvements, the system achieves an F-score of 69.77 in the
message-level task and an F-score of 88.20 in the term-level task on that test set.
In addition, we evaluate the performance of our sentiment analysis system on the domain
of movie review excerpts (message-level task only). The system is re-trained on a collection
of about 7,800 positive and negative sentences extracted from movie reviews. When applied
on the test set of unseen sentences, the system is able to correctly classify 85.5% of the test
set. This result exceeds the best result obtained on this dataset by a recursive deep learning
approach that requires access to sentiment labels of all syntactic phrases in the training-
data sentences (Socher, Perelygin, Wu, Chuang, Manning, Ng, & Potts, 2013). For the
message-level task, we do not make use of sentiment labels of phrases in the training data,
as that is often unavailable in real-world applications.
The ablation experiments reveal that the automatically built lexicons gave our system
the competitive advantage in SemEval-2013. The use of the new lexicons results in gains
of up to 6.5 percentage points over the gains obtained through the use of other features.
Furthermore, we show that the lexicons built speciﬁcally for negated contexts better model
negation than the reversing polarity approach.
The main contributions of this paper are three-fold. First, we present a sentiment
analysis system that achieves state-of-the-art performance on three domains: tweets, SMS,
and movie review excerpts. The system can be replicated using freely available resources.
Second, we describe the process of creating the automatic, tweet-speciﬁc lexicons and
demonstrate their superior predictive power over several manually and automatically cre-
ated general-purpose lexicons. Third, we analyze the impact of negation on sentiment and
propose an empirical method to estimate the sentiment of words in negated contexts by
1. SemEval is an international forum for natural-language shared tasks. The competition we refer to is
SemEval-2013 Task 2 (http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task2).
725

--- PAGE 4 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
creating a separate sentiment lexicon for negated words. All automatic lexicons described
in the paper are made available to the research community. 2
The paper is organized as follows. We begin with a description of related work in Sec-
tion 2. Next, we describe the sentiment analysis task and the data used in this research
(Section 3). Section 4 presents the sentiment lexicons used in our system: existing manually
created, general-purpose lexicons (Section 4.1) and our automatic, tweet-speciﬁc lexicons
(Section 4.2). The lexicons built for aﬃrmative and negated contexts are described in Sec-
tion 4.3. The detailed description of our supervised sentiment analysis system, including
the classiﬁcation method and the feature sets, is presented in Section 5. Section 6 provides
the results of the evaluation experiments. First, we compare the automatically created lexi-
cons with human annotations derived from the manual lexicons as well as collected through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service 3 (Section 6.1). Next, we evaluate the new lexicons on
the extrinsic task of unsupervised sentiment analysis (Section 6.2.1). The purpose of these
experiments is to compare the predictive capacity of the individual lexicons without in-
ﬂuence of other factors. Then, in Section 6.2.2 we assess the performance of the entire
supervised sentiment analysis system and examine the contribution of the features derived
from our lexicons to the overall performance. Finally, we conclude and present directions
for future work in Section 7.
2. Related Work
Over the last decade, there has been an explosion of work exploring various aspects of
sentiment analysis: detecting subjective and objective sentences; classifying sentences as
positive, negative, or neutral; detecting the person expressing the sentiment and the target
of the sentiment; detecting emotions such as joy, fear, and anger; visualizing sentiment
in text; and applying sentiment analysis in health, commerce, and disaster management.
Surveys by Pang and Lee (2008) and Liu and Zhang (2012) give a summary of many of
these approaches.
Sentiment analysis systems have been applied to many diﬀerent kinds of texts including
customer reviews, news paper headlines (Bellegarda, 2010), novels (Boucouvalas, 2002;
John, Boucouvalas, & Xu, 2006; Francisco & Gerv´ as, 2006; Mohammad & Yang, 2011),
emails (Liu, Lieberman, & Selker, 2003; Mohammad & Yang, 2011), blogs (Neviarouskaya,
Prendinger, & Ishizuka, 2011; Genereux & Evans, 2006; Mihalcea & Liu, 2006), and tweets
(Mohammad, 2012). Often these systems have to cater to the speciﬁc needs of the text
such as formality versus informality, length of utterances, etc. Sentiment analysis systems
developed speciﬁcally for tweets include those by Pak and Paroubek (2010), Agarwal, Xie,
Vovsha, Rambow, and Passonneau (2011), Thelwall, Buckley, and Paltoglou (2011), Brody
and Diakopoulos (2011), Aisopos, Papadakis, Tserpes, and Varvarigou (2012), Bakliwal,
Arora, Madhappan, Kapre, Singh, and Varma (2012). A recent survey by Mart´ ınez-C´ amara,
Mart´ ın-Valdivia, Ure˜ nal´ opez, and Montejor´ aez (2012) provides an overview of the research
on sentiment analysis of tweets.
Several manually created sentiment resources have been successfully applied in sentiment
analysis. The General Inquirer has sentiment labels for about 3,600 terms (Stone, Dunphy,
2. www.purl.com/net/sentimentoftweets
3. https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
726

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Smith, Ogilvie, & associates, 1966). Hu and Liu (2004) manually labeled about 6,800
words and used them for detecting sentiment of customer reviews. The MPQA Subjectivity
Lexicon, which draws from the General Inquirer and other sources, has sentiment labels for
about 8,000 words (Wilson, Wiebe, & Hoﬀmann, 2005). The NRC Emotion Lexicon has
sentiment and emotion labels for about 14,000 words (Mohammad & Turney, 2010). These
labels were compiled through Mechanical Turk annotations.
Semi-supervised and automatic methods have also been proposed to detect the polarity
of words. Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1997) proposed an algorithm to determine the
polarity of adjectives. SentiWordNet (SWN) was created using supervised classiﬁers as well
as manual annotation (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006). Turney and Littman (2003) proposed a
minimally supervised algorithm to calculate the polarity of a word by determining if its
tendency to co-occur with a small set of positive seed words is greater than its tendency
to co-occur with a small set of negative seed words. Mohammad, Dunne, and Dorr (2009)
automatically generated a sentiment lexicon of more than 60,000 words from a thesaurus.
We use several of these lexicons in our system. In addition, we create two new sentiment
lexicons from tweets using hashtags and emoticons. In Section 6, we show that these tweet-
speciﬁc lexicons have a higher coverage and a better predictive power than the lexicons
mentioned earlier.
Since manual annotation of data is costly, distant supervision techniques have been ac-
tively applied in the domain of short informal texts. User-provided indications of emotional
content, such as emoticons, emoji, and hashtags, have been used as noisy sentiment labels.
For example, Go, Bhayani, and Huang (2009) use tweets with emoticons as labeled data for
supervised training. Emoticons such as :) are considered positive labels of the tweets and
emoticons such as :( are used as negative labels. Davidov, Tsur, and Rappoport (2010) and
Kouloumpis, Wilson, and Moore (2011) use certain seed hashtag words such as #cute and
#sucks as labels of positive and negative sentiment. Mohammad (2012) developed a classi-
ﬁer to detect emotions using tweets with emotion word hashtags (e.g., #anger, #surprise)
as labeled data.
In our system too, we make use of the emoticons and hashtag words as signals of positive
and negative sentiment. We collected 775,000 sentiment-word hashtagged tweets and used
1.6 million emoticon tweets collected by Go et al. (2009). However, unlike previous research,
we generate sentiment lexicons from these datasets and use them (along with a relatively
small hand-labeled training dataset) to train a supervised classiﬁer. This approach has the
following beneﬁts. First, it allows us to incorporate large amounts of noisily labeled data
quickly and eﬃciently. Second, the classiﬁcation system is robust to the introduced noise
because the noisy data are incorporated not directly as training instances but indirectly
as features. Third, the generated sentiment lexicons can be easily distributed among the
research community and employed in other applications and on other domains (Kiritchenko,
Zhu, Cherry, & Mohammad, 2014).
Negation plays an important role in determining sentiment. Automatic negation han-
dling involves identifying a negation word such as not, determining the scope of negation
(which words are aﬀected by the negation word), and ﬁnally appropriately capturing the
impact of the negation. (See work by Jia, Yu, and Meng (2009), Wiegand, Balahur, Roth,
Klakow, and Montoyo (2010), Lapponi, Read, and Ovrelid (2012) for detailed analyses of
negation handling.) Traditionally, the negation word is determined from a small hand-
727

--- PAGE 6 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
crafted list (Taboada et al., 2011). The scope of negation is often assumed to begin from
the word following the negation word until the next punctuation mark or the end of the
sentence (Polanyi & Zaenen, 2004; Kennedy & Inkpen, 2005). More sophisticated methods
to detect the scope of negation through semantic parsing have also been proposed (Li, Zhou,
Wang, & Zhu, 2010).
A common way to capture the impact of negation is to reverse the polarities of the
sentiment words in the scope of negation. Taboada et al. (2011) proposed to shift the
sentiment score of a term in a negated context towards the opposite polarity by a ﬁxed
amount. However, in their experiments the shift-score model did not agree with human
judgment in many cases, especially for negated negative terms. More complex approaches,
such as recursive deep models, address negation through semantic composition (Socher,
Huval, Manning, & Ng, 2012; Socher et al., 2013). The recursive deep models work in a
bottom-top fashion over a parse-tree structure of a sentence to infer the sentiment label of
the sentence as a composition of the sentiment expressed by its constituting parts: words
and phrases. These models do not require any hand-crafted features or semantic knowledge,
such as a list of negation words. However, they are computationally intensive and need
substantial additional annotations (word and phrase-level sentiment labeling) to produce
competitive results (Socher et al., 2013). In this paper, we propose a simple corpus-based
statistical method to estimate the sentiment scores of negated words. As will be shown in
Section 6.2.2, this simple method is able to achieve the same level of accuracy as the recursive
deep learning approach. Additionally, we analyze the impact of negation on sentiment scores
of common sentiment terms.
To promote research in sentiment analysis of short informal texts and to establish a
common ground for comparison of diﬀerent approaches, an international competition was
organized by the Conference on Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2013) (Wilson
et al., 2013). The organizers created and shared tweets for training, development, and
testing. They also provided a second test set consisting of SMS messages. The purpose of
having this out-of-domain test set was to assess the ability of the systems trained on tweets
to generalize to other types of short informal texts. The competition attracted 44 teams;
there were 48 submissions from 34 teams in the message-level task and 29 submissions from
23 teams in the term-level task. Most participants (including the top 3 systems in each task)
chose a supervised machine learning approach exploiting a variety of features derived from
ngrams, stems, punctuation, POS tags, and Twitter-speciﬁc encodings (e.g., emoticons,
hashtags, abbreviations). Only one of the top-performing systems was entirely rule-based
with hand-written rules (Reckman, Baird, Crawford, Crowell, Micciulla, Sethi, & Veress,
2013). Twitter-speciﬁc pre-processing (e.g., tokenization, normalization) as well as negation
handling were commonly applied. Almost all systems beneﬁted from sentiment lexicons:
MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon, SentiWordNet, and others. Existing, low-coverage lexicons
were sometimes extended with distributionally similar words (Proisl, Greiner, Evert, &
Kabashi, 2013) or sentiment-associated words collected from noisily labeled data (Becker,
Erhart, Skiba, & Matula, 2013). Those extended lexicons, however, were still an order of
magnitude smaller than the tweet-speciﬁc lexicons we created. For the full results of the
competition and further details we refer the reader to Wilson et al. (2013).
Some research approaches sentiment analysis as a two-tier problem: ﬁrst a piece of text
is marked as either objective or subjective, and then only the subjective text is assessed
728

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
to determine whether it is positive, negative, or neutral (Wiebe, Wilson, & Cardie, 2005;
Choi & Cardie, 2010; Johansson & Moschitti, 2013; Yang & Cardie, 2013). However, this
can lead to a propagation of errors (for example, the system may mark a subjective text
as objective). Further, one can argue that even objective statements can express sentiment
(for example, “the sales of Blackberries are 0.002% of what they used to be 5 years back”).
We model sentiment directly as a three-class problem: positive, negative, or neutral.
Also, this paper focuses on sentiment analysis alone and does not consider the task
of associating the sentiment with its targets. There has been interesting work studying
the latter problem (e.g., Jiang, Yu, Zhou, Liu, & Zhao, 2011; Sauper & Barzilay, 2013).
In (Kiritchenko et al., 2014) we show how our approach can be adapted to identify the
sentiment for a speciﬁed target. The system ranked ﬁrst in the SemEval-2014 shared task
‘Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis’.
3. Task and Data Description
In this work, we follow the deﬁnition of the task and use the data provided for the SemEval-
2013 competition: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter (Wilson et al., 2013). This competition
had two tasks: a message-level task and a term-level task. The objective of the message-
level task is to detect whether the whole message conveys a positive, negative, or neutral
sentiment. The objective of the term-level task is to detect whether a given target term (a
single word or a multi-word expression) conveys a positive, negative, or neutral sentiment
in the context of a message. Note that the same term may express diﬀerent sentiments
in diﬀerent contexts. For example, the word unpredictable expresses positive sentiment in
sentence “The movie has an unpredictable ending ”; whereas, it expresses negative sentiment
in sentence “The car has unpredictable steering ”.
Two test sets – one with tweets and one with SMS messages – were provided to the
participants for each task. Training and development data were available only for tweets.
Here we brieﬂy describe how the data were collected and annotated (for more details see
the task description paper (Wilson et al., 2013)). Tweets were collected through the public
streaming Twitter API during a period of one year: from January 2012 to January 2013. To
reduce the data skew towards the neutral class, messages that did not contain any polarity
word listed in SentiWordNet 3.0 were discarded. The remaining messages were annotated for
sentiment through Mechanical Turk.4 Each annotator had to mark the positive, negative,
and neutral parts of a message as well as to provide the overall polarity label for the message.
Later, the annotations were combined through intersection for the term-level task and by
majority voting for the message-level task. The details on data collection and annotation
were released to the participants after the competition.
The data characteristics for both tasks are shown in Table 1. The training set was
distributed through tweet ids and a download script. However, not all tweets were accessible.
For example, a Twitter user could have deleted her messages, and thus these messages
would not be available. Table 1 shows the number of the training examples we were able
to download. The development and test sets were provided in full by FTP.
4. Messages presented to annotators did not have polarity words marked in any way.
729

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 1: Data statistics for the SemEval-2013 training set, development set and two testing
sets. “# of tokens per mess.” denotes the average number of tokens per message
in the dataset. “Vocab. size” represents the number of unique tokens excluding
punctuation and numerals.
Number of instances # tokens Vocab.
Dataset Positive Negative Neutral Total per mess. size
Message-level task:
Training set 3,045 (37%) 1,209 (15%) 4,004 (48%) 8,258 22.09 21,848
Development set 575 (35%) 340 (20%) 739 (45%) 1,654 22.19 6,543
Tweet test set 1,572 (41%) 601 (16%) 1,640 (43%) 3,813 22.15 12,977
SMS test set 492 (23%) 394 (19%) 1,208 (58%) 2,094 18.05 3,513
Term-level task:
Training set 4,831 (62%) 2,540 (33%) 385 (5%) 7,756 22.55 15,238
Development set 648 (57%) 430 (38%) 57 (5%) 1,135 22.93 3,909
Tweet test set 2,734 (62%) 1,541 (35%) 160 (3%) 4,435 22.63 10,383
SMS test set 1,071 (46%) 1,104 (47%) 159 (7%) 2,334 19.95 2,979
The tweets are comprised of regular English-language words as well as Twitter-speciﬁc
terms, such as emoticons, URLs, and creative spellings. Using WordNet 3.0 5 (147,278
word types) supplemented with a large list of stop words (571 words) 6 as a repository of
English-language words, we found that about 45% of the vocabulary in the tweet datasets
are out-of-dictionary terms. These out-of-dictionary terms fall into diﬀerent categories, e.g.,
named entities (names of people, places, companies, etc.) not found in WordNet, hashtags,
user mentions, etc. We use the Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) Twitter NLP tool to
automatically identify the categories. The tool was shown to achieve 89% tagging accuracy
on tweet data (Gimpel, Schneider, O’Connor, Das, Mills, Eisenstein, Heilman, Yogatama,
Flanigan, & Smith, 2011). Table 2 shows the distribution of the out-of-dictionary terms by
category.7 One can observe that most of the out-of-dictionary terms are named entities as
well as user mentions, URLs, and hashtags. There is also a moderate amount of creatively
spelled regular English words and slang words used as nouns, verbs, and adjectives. In the
SMS test set, out-of-dictionary terms constitute a smaller proportion of the vocabulary,
about 25%. These are mostly named entities, interjections, creative spellings, and slang.
The SemEval-2013 training and development data are used to train our supervised sen-
timent analysis system presented in Section 5. The performance of the system is evaluated
on both test sets, tweets and SMS (Section 6.2.2). The test data are also used in the
experiments on comparing the performance of sentiment lexicons in unsupervised settings
(Section 6.2.1).
5. http://wordnet.princeton.edu
6. The SMART stopword list built by Gerard Salton and Chris Buckley for the SMART information retrieval
system at Cornell University (http://www.lextek.com/manuals/onix/stopwords2.html) is used.
7. The percentages in the columns do not sum up to 100% because some terms can be used in multiple
categories (e.g., as a noun and a verb).
730

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 2: The distribution of the out-of-dictionary tokens by category for the SemEval-2013
tweet and SMS test sets.
Category of tokens Tweet test set SMS test set
named entities 31.84% 32.63%
user mentions 21.23% 0.11%
URLs 16.92% 0.84%
hashtags 10.94% 0%
interjections 2.56% 10.32%
emoticons 1.40% 1.89%
nouns 8.52% 25.47%
verbs 3.05% 18.95%
adjectives 1.43% 4.84%
adverbs 0.70% 6.21%
others 4.00% 15.69%
In addition to the SemEval-2013 datasets, we evaluate the system on a dataset of movie
review excerpts (Socher et al., 2013). The task is to predict the sentiment label (positive
or negative) of a given sentence, extracted from a longer movie review (message-level task).
The dataset is comprised of 4,963 positive and 4,650 negative sentences split into the train-
ing (6,920 sentences), development (872 sentences), and test (1,821 sentences) sets. Since
detailed phrase-level annotations are not available for most real-world applications, we use
only sentence-level annotations and ignore the phrase-level annotations and the parse-tree
structures of the sentences provided with the data. We train our sentiment analysis system
on the training and development subsets and evaluate its performance on the test subset.
The results of these experiments are reported in Section 6.2.2.
4. Sentiment Lexicons Used by Our System
4.1 Existing, General-Purpose, Manually Created Sentiment Lexicons
Most of the lexicons that were created by manual annotation tend to be domain free and
include a few thousand terms. The lexicons that we use include the NRC Emotion Lexicon
(Mohammad & Turney, 2010), Bing Liu’s Lexicon (Hu & Liu, 2004), and the MPQA Sub-
jectivity Lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005). The NRC Emotion Lexicon is comprised of frequent
English nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs annotated for eight emotions (joy, sadness,
anger, fear, disgust, surprise, trust, and anticipation) as well as for positive and negative
sentiment. Bing Liu’s Lexicon provides a list of positive and negative words manually ex-
tracted from customer reviews. The MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon contains words marked
with their prior polarity (positive or negative) and a discrete strength of evaluative intensity
(strong or weak). Entities in these lexicons do not come with a real-valued score indicating
the ﬁne-grained evaluative intensity.
731

--- PAGE 10 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
4.2 New, Tweet-Speciﬁc, Automatically Generated Sentiment Lexicons
4.2.1 Hashtag Sentiment Lexicon
Certain words in tweets are specially marked with a hashtag (#) and can indicate the topic
or sentiment. Mohammad (2012) showed that hashtagged emotion words such as #joy,
#sad, #angry, and #surprised are good indicators that the tweet as a whole (even without
the hashtagged emotion word) is expressing the same emotion. We adapted that idea to
create a large corpus of positive and negative tweets. From this corpus we then automatically
generated a high-coverage, tweet-speciﬁc sentiment lexicon as described below.
We polled the Twitter API every four hours from April to December 2012 in search
of tweets with either a positive-word hashtag or a negative-word hashtag. A collection
of 77 seed words closely associated with positive and negative sentiment such as #good,
#excellent, #bad, and #terrible were used (30 positive and 47 negative). These terms were
chosen from entries for positive and negative in Roget’s Thesaurus8. About 2 million tweets
were collected in total. We used the metadata tag “iso language code” to identify English
tweets. Since this tag is not always reliable, we additionally discarded tweets that did not
have at least two valid English content words from Roget’s Thesaurus. 9 This step also
helped discard very short tweets and tweets with a large proportion of misspelled words.
A set of 775,000 remaining tweets, which we refer to as Hashtag Sentiment Corpus ,
was used to generate a large word–sentiment association lexicon. A tweet was considered
positive if it had one of the 30 positive hashtagged seed words, and negative if it had one
of the 47 negative hashtagged seed words. The sentiment score for a term w was calculated
from these pseudo-labeled tweets as shown below:
Sentiment Score (w) = PMI (w , positive)− PMI (w , negative) (1)
PMI stands for pointwise mutual information:
PMI (w , positive) = log2
freq (w , positive)∗ N
freq (w)∗ freq (positive) (2)
where freq(w, positive) is the number of times a term w occurs in positive tweets, freq(w)
is the total frequency of term w in the corpus, freq(positive) is the total number of tokens
in positive tweets, and N is the total number of tokens in the corpus. PMI (w, negative) is
calculated in a similar way. Thus, equation 1 is simpliﬁed to:
Sentiment Score (w) = log2
freq (w , positive)∗ freq (negative)
freq (w , negative)∗ freq (positive) (3)
Since PMI is known to be a poor estimator of association for low-frequency events, we
ignore terms that occurred less than ﬁve times in each (positive and negative) group of
tweets.10
8. http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10681
9. Any word in the thesaurus was considered a content word with the exception of the words from the
SMART stopword list.
10. The same threshold of ﬁve occurrences in at least one class (positive or negative) is applied for all
automatic tweet-speciﬁc lexicons discussed in this paper. There is no thresholding on the sentiment
score.
732

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
A positive sentiment score indicates a greater overall association with positive sentiment,
whereas a negative score indicates a greater association with negative sentiment. The
magnitude is indicative of the degree of association. Note that there exist numerous other
methods to estimate the degree of association of a term with a category (e.g., cross entropy,
Chi-squared, and information gain). We have chosen PMI because it is simple and robust
and has been successfully applied in a number of NLP tasks (Turney, 2001; Turney &
Littman, 2003).
The ﬁnal lexicon, which we will refer to as Hashtag Sentiment Base Lexicon (HS Base)
has entries for 39,413 unigrams and 178,851 bigrams. Entries were also generated for
unigram–unigram, unigram–bigram, and bigram–bigram pairs that were not necessarily
contiguous in the tweets corpus. Pairs where at least one of the terms is punctuation (e.g.,
“,”, “?”, “.”), a user mention, a URL, or a function word (e.g., “a”, “the”, “and”) were
removed. The lexicon has entries for 308,808 non-contiguous pairs.
4.2.2 Sentiment140 Lexicon
The Sentiment140 Corpus (Go et al., 2009) is a collection of 1.6 million tweets that contain
emoticons. The tweets are labeled positive or negative according to the emoticon. We
generated the Sentiment140 Base Lexicon (S140 Base) from this corpus in the same manner
as described above for the hashtagged tweets using Equation 1. This lexicon has entries
for 65,361 unigrams, 266,510 bigrams, and 480,010 non-contiguous pairs. In the following
section, we further build on the proposed approach to create separate lexicons for terms in
aﬃrmative contexts and for terms in negated contexts.
4.3 Aﬃrmative Context and Negated Context Lexicons
A word in a negated context has a diﬀerent evaluative nature than the same word in an
aﬃrmative (non-negated) context. This diﬀerence may include the change in the polarity
category (positive becomes negative or vice versa), the evaluative intensity, or both. For
example, highly positive words (e.g., great) when negated tend to experience both, polarity
change and intensity decrease, forming mildly negative phrases (e.g., not great ). On the
other hand, many strong negative words (e.g., terrible) when negated keep their negative
polarity and just shift their intensity. The conventional approach of reversing polarity is
not able to handle these cases properly.
We propose an empirical method to determine the sentiment of words in the presence of
negation. We create separate lexicons for aﬃrmative and negated contexts. In this way, two
sentiment scores for each term w are computed: one for aﬃrmative contexts and another
for negated contexts. The lexicons are created as follows. The Hashtag Sentiment Corpus
is split into two parts: Aﬃrmative Context Corpus and Negated Context Corpus. Following
the work by Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan (2002), we deﬁne a negated context as a segment
of a tweet that starts with a negation word (e.g., no, shouldn’t) and ends with one of the
punctuation marks: ‘,’, ‘.’, ‘:’, ‘;’, ‘!’, ‘?’. The list of negation words was adopted from
Christopher Potts’ sentiment tutorial. 11 Thus, part of a tweet that is marked as negated
is included into the Negated Context Corpus while the rest of the tweet becomes part
of the Aﬃrmative Context Corpus. The sentiment label for the tweet is kept unchanged
11. http://sentiment.christopherpotts.net/lingstruc.html
733

--- PAGE 12 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 3: Example sentiment scores from the Sentiment140 Base, Aﬃrmative Context
(AﬀLex) and Negated Context (NegLex) Lexicons.
Term Sentiment140 Lexicons
Base AﬀLex NegLex
Positive terms
great 1.177 1.273 -0.367
beautiful 1.049 1.112 0.217
nice 0.974 1.149 -0.912
good 0.825 1.167 -1.414
honest 0.391 0.431 -0.123
Negative terms
terrible -1.766 -1.850 -0.890
shame -1.457 -1.548 -0.722
bad -1.297 -1.674 0.021
ugly -0.899 -0.964 -0.772
negative -0.090 -0.261 0.389
in both corpora. Then, we generate the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon (HS AﬀLex) from
the Aﬃrmative Context Corpus and the Negated Context Lexicon (HS NegLex) from the
Negated Context Corpus using the technique described in Section 4.2. We will refer to
the sentiment score calculated from the Aﬃrmative Context Corpus as scoreAﬀLex(w) and
the score calculated from the Negated Context Corpus as scoreNegLex(w). Similarly, the
Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon (S140 AﬀLex) and the Sentiment140 Negated
Context Lexicon (S140 NegLex) are built from the Aﬃrmative Context and the Negated
Context parts of the Sentiment140 tweet corpus. To employ these lexicons on a separate
dataset, we apply the same technique to split each message into aﬃrmative and negated
contexts and then match words in aﬃrmative contexts against the Aﬃrmative Context
Lexicons and words in negated contexts against the Negated Context Lexicons.
Computing a sentiment score for a term w only from aﬃrmative contexts makes
scoreAﬀLex(w) more precise since it is no longer polluted by negation. Positive terms get
stronger positive scores and negative terms get stronger negative scores. Furthermore, for
the ﬁrst time, we create lexicons for negated terms and compute scoreNegLex(w) that re-
ﬂects the behaviour of words in the presence of negation. Table 3 shows a few examples of
positive and negative terms with their sentiment scores from the Sentiment140 Base, Aﬃr-
mative Context (AﬀLex) and Negated Context (NegLex) Lexicons. In Fig. 1, we visualize
the relationship between scoreAﬀLex(w) and scoreNegLex(w) for a set of words manually an-
notated for sentiment in the MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon. The x-axis is scoreAﬀLex(w), the
sentiment score of a term w in the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon; the y-axis
is scoreNegLex(w), the sentiment score of a term w in the Sentiment140 Negated Context
Lexicon. Dots in the plot correspond to words that occur in each of the MPQA Subjectiv-
ity Lexicon, the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon, and the Sentiment140 Negated
Context Lexicon. Furthermore, we discard the terms whose polarity category (positive or
negative) in the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon does not match their polarity in
the MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon. We observe that when negated, 76% of the positive terms
734

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
-4.5 -3.5 -2.5 -1.5 -0.5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 
scoreNegLex(w) 
scoreAffLex(w) 
Figure 1: The sentiment scores from the Sentiment140 AﬀLex and the Sentiment140 NegLex
for 480 positive and 486 negative terms from the MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon.
The x-axis is scoreAﬀLex(w), the sentiment score of a term w in the Sentiment140
Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon; the y-axis is scoreNegLex(w), the sentiment score of
a term w in the Sentiment140 Negated Context Lexicon. Each dot corresponds to
one (positive or negative) term. The graph shows that positive and negative terms
when negated tend to convey a negative sentiment. Negation aﬀects sentiment
diﬀerently for each term.
reverse their polarity whereas 82% of the negative terms keep their polarity orientation and
just shift their sentiment scores. (This behaviour agrees well with human judgments from
the study by Taboada et al. (2011).) Changes in evaluative intensity vary from term to
term. For example, scoreNegLex(good) <−scoreAﬀLex(good) whereas scoreNegLex(great) >
−scoreAﬀLex(great).
We also compiled a list of 596 antonym pairs from WordNet and compare the scores
of terms in the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon with the scores of the terms’
antonyms in the Sentiment140 Negated Context Lexicon. We found that 51% of negated
positive terms are less negative than their corresponding antonyms (e.g.,
scoreNegLex(good) > scoreAﬀLex(bad)), but 95% of negated negative terms are more negative
than their positive antonyms (e.g., scoreNegLex(ugly) < scoreAﬀLex(beautiful)).
These experiments reveal the tendency of positive terms when negated to convey a
negative sentiment and the tendency of negative terms when negated to still convey a
negative sentiment. Moreover, the degree of change in evaluative intensity appears to be
term-dependent. Capturing all these diﬀerent behaviours of terms in negated contexts by
means of the Negated Context Lexicons empower our automatic sentiment analysis system
as we demonstrate through experiments in Section 6. Furthermore, we believe that the
Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and the Negated Context Lexicons can be valuable in other
735

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
applications such as textual entailment recognition, paraphrase detection, and machine
translation. For instance in the paraphrase detection task, given two sentences “The hotel
room wasn’t terrible.” and “The hotel room was excellent.” an automatic system can
correctly infer that these sentences are not paraphrases by looking up scoreNegLex(terrible)
and scoreAﬀLex(excellent) and seeing that the polarities and intensities of these terms do
not match (i.e., scoreAﬀLex(excellent) is highly positive and scoreNegLex(terrible) is slightly
negative). At the same time, a mistake can easily be made with conventional lexicons
and the polarity reversing strategy, according to which the strong negative term terrible is
assumed to convey a strong positive sentiment in the presence of negation and, therefore,
the polarities and intensities of the two terms would match.
4.4 Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons
We propose to further improve the method of constructing the Negated Context Lexicons
by splitting a negated context into two parts: the immediate context consisting of a sin-
gle token that directly follows a negation word, and the distant context consisting of the
rest of the tokens in the negated context. We refer to these lexicons as Negated Context
(Positional) Lexicons. Each token in a Negated Context (Positional) Lexicon can have two
scores: immediate-context score and distant-context score. The beneﬁts of this approach
are two-fold. Intuitively, negation aﬀects words directly following a negation word more
strongly than the words farther away. Compare, for example, immediate negation in not
good and more distant negation in not very good, not as good, not such a good idea. Second,
immediate-context scores are less noisy. Our simple negation scope identiﬁcation algorithm
can occasionally fail and include into negated context parts of a tweet that are not actually
negated (e.g., if a punctuation mark is missing). These errors have less eﬀect on immediate
context. When employing these lexicons, we use an immediate-context score for a word
immediately preceded by a negation word and use distant-context scores for all other words
aﬀected by a negation. As before, for non-negated parts of a message, sentiment scores from
an Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon are used. Assuming that words occur in distant contexts
more often than in immediate contexts, this approach can introduce more sparseness to the
lexicons. Thus, we apply a back-oﬀ strategy: if an immediate-context score is not available
for a token immediately following a negation word, its distant-context score is used instead.
In Section 6, we experimentally show that the Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons pro-
vide additional beneﬁts to our sentiment analysis system over the regular Negated Context
Lexicons described in the previous section.
4.5 Lexicon Coverage
Table 4 shows the number of positive and negative entries in each of the sentiment lexicons
discussed above. The automatically generated lexicons are an order of magnitude larger
than the manually created lexicons. We can see that all manual lexicons contain more
negative terms than positive terms. In the automatically generated lexicons, this imbalance
is less pronounced (49% positive vs. 51% negative in the Hashtag Sentiment Base Lexicon)
or even reversed (61% positive vs. 39% negative in the Sentiment140 Base Lexicon). The
Sentiment140 Base Lexicon was created from an equal number of positive and negative
tweets. Therefore, the prevalence of positive terms corresponds to the general trend in
736

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 4: The number of positive and negative entries in the sentiment lexicons.
Lexicon Positive Negative Total
NRC Emotion Lexicon 2,312 (41%) 3,324 (59%) 5,636
Bing Liu’s Lexicon 2,006 (30%) 4,783 (70%) 6,789
MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon 2,718 (36%) 4,911 (64%) 7,629
Hashtag Sentiment Lexicons (HS)
HS Base Lexicon
- unigrams 19,121 (49%) 20,292 (51%) 39,413
- bigrams 69,337 (39%) 109,514 (61%) 178,851
HS AﬀLex
- unigrams 19,344 (51%) 18,905 (49%) 38,249
- bigrams 67,070 (42%) 90,788 (58%) 157,858
HS NegLex
- unigrams 936 (14%) 5,536 (86%) 6,472
- bigrams 3,954 (15%) 22,258 (85%) 26,212
Sentiment140 Lexicons (S140)
S140 Base Lexicon
- unigrams 39,979 (61%) 25,382 (39%) 65,361
- bigrams 135,280 (51%) 131,230 (49%) 266,510
S140 AﬀLex
- unigrams 40,422 (63%) 23,382 (37%) 63,804
- bigrams 133,242 (55%) 107,206 (45%) 240,448
S140 NegLex
- unigrams 1,038 (12%) 7,315 (88%) 8,353
- bigrams 5,913 (16%) 32,128 (84%) 38,041
language and supports the Polyanna Hypothesis (Boucher & Osgood, 1969), which states
that people tend to use positive terms more frequently and diversely than negative. Note,
however, that negative terms are dominant in the Negated Context Lexicons since most
terms, both positive and negative, tend to convey negative sentiment in the presence of
negation. The overall sizes of the Negated Context Lexicons are rather small since negation
occurs only in 24% of the tweets in the Hashtag and Sentiment140 corpora and only part
of a message with negation is actually negated.
Table 5 shows the diﬀerences in coverage between the lexicons. Speciﬁcally, it gives the
number of additional terms a lexicon in row X has in comparison to a lexicon in column
Y and the percentage of tokens in the SemEval-2013 tweet test set covered by these extra
entries of lexicon X (numbers in brackets). For instance, almost half of Bing Liu’s Lexicon
(3,457 terms) is not found in the Sentiment140 Base Lexicon. However, these additional
terms represent only 0.05% of all the tokens from the tweet test set. These are terms that
are rarely used in short informal writing (e.g., acrimoniously, bestial, nepotism). Each of
the manually created lexicons covers extra 2–3% of the test data compared to other manual
lexicons. On the other hand, the automatically generated lexicons cover 60% more tokens
in the test data. Both automatic lexicons provide a number of terms not found in the other.
737

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 5: Lexicon’s supplemental coverage: for row X and column Y, the number of Lexicon
X’s entries that are not found in Lexicon Y and (in brackets) the percentage of
tokens in the SemEval-2013 tweet test set covered by these extra entries of Lexi-
con X. ‘NRC’ stands for NRC Emotion Lexicon, ‘B.L.’ is for Bing Liu’s Lexicon,
‘MPQA’ is for MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon, ‘HS’ is for Hashtag Sentiment Base
Lexicon, ‘S140’ is for Sentiment140 Base Lexicon.
Lexicon NRC B.L. MPQA HS S140
NRC - 3,179 (2.25%) 3,010 (2.00%) 2,480 (0.09%) 1,973 (0.05%)
B.L. 4,410 (1.72%) - 1,383 (0.70%) 4,001 (0.07%) 3,457 (0.05%)
MPQA 3,905 (3.37%) 1,047 (2.60%) - 3,719 (0.07%) 3,232 (0.04%)
HS 36,338 (64.23%) 36,628 (64.73%) 36,682 (62.84%) - 15,185 (0.59%)
S140 61,779 (64.13%) 62,032 (64.65%) 62,143 (62.74%) 41,133 (0.53%) -
5. Our System
5.1 Classiﬁer
Our system, NRC-Canada Sentiment Analysis System, employs supervised statistical ma-
chine learning. For both tasks, message-level and term-level, we train a linear-kernel Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) (Chang & Lin, 2011) classiﬁer on the available training data.
SVM is a state-of-the-art learning algorithm proved to be eﬀective on text categorization
tasks and robust on large feature spaces. In the preliminary experiments, a linear-kernel
SVM outperformed a maximum-entropy classiﬁer. Also, a linear-kernel SVM showed bet-
ter performance than an SVM with another commonly used kernel, radial basis function
(RBF).
The classiﬁcation model leverages a variety of surface-form, semantic, and sentiment
lexicon features described below. The sentiment lexicon features are derived from three
existing, general-purpose, manual lexicons (NRC Emotion Lexicon, Bing Liu’s Lexicon,
and MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon), and four newly created, tweet-speciﬁc lexicons (Hashtag
Sentiment Aﬃrmative Context, Hashtag Sentiment Negated Context (Positional), Senti-
ment140 Aﬃrmative Context, and Sentiment140 Negated Context (Positional)).
5.2 Features
5.2.1 Message-Level Task
For the message-level task, the following pre-processing steps are performed. URLs and
user mentions are normalized to http://someurl and @someuser, respectively. Tweets are
tokenized and part-of-speech tagged with the CMU Twitter NLP tool (Gimpel et al., 2011).
Then, each tweet is represented as a feature vector. We employ commonly used text classi-
ﬁcation features such as ngrams and part-of-speech tag counts, as well as common Twitter-
speciﬁc features such as emoticon and hashtag counts. In addition, we introduce several
lexicon features that take advantage of the knowledge present in manually and automati-
cally created lexicons. These features are designed to explicitly handle negation. Table 6
738

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 6: Examples of features that the system would generate for message “GRRREAT
show!!! Hope not to miss the next one :)”. Numeric features are presented in the
format: <feature name>:<feature value>. Binary features are italicized; only
features with value of 1 are shown.
Feature group Examples
word ngrams grrreat, show, grrreat show, miss NEG, miss NEG the
character ngrams grr, grrr, grrre, rrr, rrre, rrrea
all-caps all-caps:1
POS POS N:1 (nouns), POS V:2 (verbs), POS E:1 (emoticons),
POS ,:1 (punctuation)
automatic lexicon HS unigrams positive count:4, HS unigrams negative total score:1.51,
features HS unigrams POS N combined total score:0.19,
HS bigrams positive total score:3.55, HS bigrams negative max score:1.98
manual lexicon MPQA positive aﬃrmative score:2, MPQA negative negated score:1,
features BINGLIU POS V negative negated score:1
punctuation punctuation !:1
emoticons emoticon positive:1, emoticon positive last
elongated words elongation:1
clusters cluster 11111001110, cluster 10001111
provides some example features for tweet “GRRREAT show!!! Hope not to miss the next
one :)”.
The features:
• word ngrams: presence or absence of contiguous sequences of 1, 2, 3, and 4 tokens;
non-contiguous ngrams (ngrams with one token replaced by *);
• character ngrams: presence or absence of contiguous sequences of 3, 4, and 5 charac-
ters;
• all-caps: the number of tokens with all characters in upper case;
• POS: the number of occurrences of each part-of-speech tag;
• hashtags: the number of hashtags;
• negation: the number of negated contexts. Negation also aﬀects the ngram features:
a word w becomes w NEG in a negated context;
• sentiment lexicons:
– Automatic lexicons The following sets of features are generated separately for
the Hashtag Sentiment Lexicons (HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex (Positional)) and the
Sentiment140 Lexicons (S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex (Positional)). For each
token w occurring in a tweet and present in the lexicons, we use its sentiment
score (scoreAﬀLex(w) if w occurs in an aﬃrmative context and scoreNegLex(w) if
w occurs in a negated context) to compute:
∗ the number of tokens with score(w)̸= 0;
∗ the total score = ∑
w∈tweet score(w);
∗ the maximal score = max w∈tweetscore(w);
739

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
∗ the score of the last token in the tweet.
These features are calculated for all positive tokens (tokens with sentiment scores
greater than zero), for all negative tokens (tokens with sentiment scores less than
zero), and for all tokens in a tweet. Similar feature sets are also created for
each part-of-speech tag and for hashtags. Separate feature sets are produced for
unigrams, bigrams, and non-contiguous pairs.
– Manual lexicons For each of the three manual sentiment lexicons (NRC Emo-
tion Lexicon, Bing Liu’s Lexicon, and MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon), we compute
the following four features:
∗ the sum of positive scores for tweet tokens in aﬃrmative contexts;
∗ the sum of negative scores for tweet tokens in aﬃrmative contexts;
∗ the sum of positive scores for tweet tokens in negated contexts;
∗ the sum of negative scores for tweet tokens in negated contexts.
Negated contexts are identiﬁed exactly as described earlier in Section 4.3 (the
method for creating the Negated Context Corpora). The remaining parts of the
messages are treated as aﬃrmative contexts. We use the score of +1 for positive
entries and the score of -1 for negative entries for the NRC Emotion Lexicon
and Bing Liu’s Lexicon. For MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon, which provides two
grades of the association strength (strong and weak), we use scores +1/-1 for
weak associations and +2/-2 for strong associations. The same feature sets are
also created for each part-of-speech tag, for hashtags, and for all-caps tokens.
• punctuation:
– the number of contiguous sequences of exclamation marks, question marks, and
both exclamation and question marks;
– whether the last token contains an exclamation or question mark;
• emoticons: The polarity of an emoticon is determined with a regular expression
adopted from Christopher Potts’ tokenizing script: 12
– presence or absence of positive and negative emoticons at any position in the
tweet;
– whether the last token is a positive or negative emoticon;
• elongated words: the number of words with one character repeated more than two
times, for example, soooo;
• clusters: The CMU Twitter NLP tool provides token clusters produced with the
Brown clustering algorithm on 56 million English-language tweets. These 1,000 clus-
ters serve as alternative representation of tweet content, reducing the sparcity of the
token space.
– the presence or absence of tokens from each of the 1000 clusters.
12. http://sentiment.christopherpotts.net/tokenizing.html
740

--- PAGE 19 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
5.2.2 Term-level Task
The pre-processing steps for the term-level task include tokenization and stemming with
Porter stemmer (Porter, 1980). 13 Then, each tweet is represented as a feature vector with
the following groups of features:
• word ngrams:
– presence or absence of unigrams, bigrams, and the full word string of a target
term;
– leading and ending unigrams and bigrams;
• character ngrams: presence or absence of two- and three-character preﬁxes and suﬃxes
of all the words in a target term (note that the target term may be a multi-word
sequence);
• upper case:
– whether all the words in the target start with an upper case letter followed by
lower case letters;
– whether the target words are all in uppercase (to capture a potential named
entity);
• stopwords: whether a term contains only stop-words. If so, a separate set of features
indicates whether there are 1, 2, 3, or more stop-words;
• negation: similar to the message-level task;
• sentiment lexicons: for each of the manual sentiment lexicons (NRC Emotion Lexi-
con, Bing Liu’s Lexicon, and MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon) and automatic sentiment
lexicons (HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex (Positional), and S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex
(Positional) Lexicons), we compute the following three features:
– the sum of positive scores;
– the sum of negative scores;
– the total score.
For the manual lexicons, the polarity reversing strategy is applied to negation.14 Note
that words themselves and not their stems are matched against the sentiment lexicons.
• punctuation: presence or absence of punctuation sequences such as ‘?!’ and ‘!!!’;
• emoticons: the numbers and categories of emoticons that a term contains 15;
• elongated words: presence or absence of elongated words;
• lengths:
– the length of a target term (number of words);
13. Some diﬀerences in implementation, such as the use of a stemmer, are simply a result of diﬀerent team
members working on the two tasks.
14. In the experiments on the development dataset, these manual lexicon features showed better performance
on the term-level task than the set of four features used for the message-level task.
15. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of emoticons
741

--- PAGE 20 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
– the average length of words (number of characters) in a term;
– a binary feature indicating whether a term contains long words;
• position: whether a term is at the beginning, at the end, or at another position in a
tweet;
• term splitting: when a term contains a hashtag made of multiple words (e.g.,#biggest-
daythisyear), we split the hashtag into component words;
• others:
– whether a term contains a Twitter user name;
– whether a term contains a URL.
The above features are extracted from target terms as well as from the rest of the
message (the context). For unigrams and bigrams, we use four words on either side of the
target as the context. The window size was chosen through experiments on the development
set.
6. Experiments
This section presents the evaluation experiments that demonstrate the state-of-the-art per-
formance of our sentiment analysis system on three domains: tweets, SMS, and movie
review excerpts. The experiments also reveal the superior predictive power of the new,
tweet-speciﬁc, automatically created lexicons over existing, general-purpose lexicons. Fur-
thermore, they show that the Negated Context Lexicons can bring additional gains over the
standard polarity reversing strategy of handling negation.
We begin with intrinsic evaluation of the automatic lexicons by comparing them to the
manually created sentiment lexicons and to human annotated sentiment scores. Next, we
assess the value of the lexicons as part of a sentiment analysis system in both, supervised
and unsupervised settings. The goal of the experiments in unsupervised sentiment analysis
(Section 6.2.1) is to compare the predictive capacity of the lexicons with the simplest setup
to reduce the inﬂuence of other factors (such as the choice of features) as much as possible.
Also, we evaluate the impact of the amount of data used to create an automatic lexicon
on the quality of the lexicon. Then, in Section 6.2.2 we evaluate the performance of our
supervised sentiment analysis system and analyze the contributions of features derived from
diﬀerent sentiment lexicons.
6.1 Intrinsic Evaluation of the Lexicons
To intrinsically evaluate our tweet-speciﬁc, automatically created sentiment lexicons, we ﬁrst
compare them to existing manually created sentiment lexicons (Section 6.1.1). However,
existing manual lexicons tend to only have discrete labels for terms (positive, negative,
neutral) but no real-valued scores indicating the intensity of sentiment. In Section 6.1.2,
we show how we collected human annotated real-valued sentiment scores using the MaxDiﬀ
method of annotation (Louviere, 1991). We then compare the association scores in the
automatically generated lexicons with these human annotated scores.
742

--- PAGE 21 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 7: Agreement in polarity assignments between the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context
Lexicon and the manual lexicons. Agreement between two lexicons is measured
as the percentage of shared terms given the same sentiment label (positive or
negative) by both lexicons. The agreement is calculated for three sets of terms:
(1) all shared terms; (2) shared terms whose sentiment score in S140 AﬀLex has
an absolute value greater than or equal to 1 (|score(w)|≥ 1); and (3) shared terms
whose sentiment score in S140 AﬀLex has an absolute value greater than or equal
to 2 (|score(w)|≥ 2). Sentiment scores in S140 AﬀLex range from -5.9 to 6.8.
Lexicon Number of Agreement
shared terms All terms |score(w)|≥ 1 |score(w)|≥ 2
NRC Emotion Lexicon 3,472 73.96% 89.96% 98.61%
Bing Liu’s Lexicon 3,213 78.24% 92.32% 99.45%
MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon 3,105 75.91% 90.26% 98.59%
6.1.1 Comparing with Existing Manually Created Sentiment Lexicons
We examine the terms in the intersection of a manual lexicon and an automatic lexicon and
measure the agreement between the lexicons as the percentage of the shared terms having
the same polarity label (positive or negative) assigned by both lexicons. Table 7 shows the
results for the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context Lexicon and three manual lexicons: NRC
Emotion Lexicon, Bing Liu’s Lexicon, and MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon. Similar ﬁgures (not
shown in the table) are obtained for other automatic lexicons (HS Base Lexicon, HS AﬀLex,
and S140 Base): the agreement for all terms ranges between 71% and 78%. If we consider
only terms whose sentiment scores in the automatic lexicon have higher absolute values,
the agreement numbers substantially increase. Thus, automatically generated entries with
higher absolute sentiment values prove to be more reliable.
6.1.2 Comparing with Human Annotated Sentiment Association Scores
Apart from polarity labels, the automatic lexicons provide sentiment scores indicating the
degree of the association of the term with positive or negative sentiment. It should be noted
that the individual scores themselves are somewhat meaningless other than their ability to
indicate that one word is more positive (or more negative) than another. However, there
exists no resource that can be used to determine if the real-valued scores match human
intuition. In this section, we describe how we collected human annotations of terms for
sentiment association scores using crowdsourcing.
MaxDiﬀ method of annotation: For people, assigning a score indicating the degree
of sentiment is not natural. Diﬀerent people may assign diﬀerent scores to the same target
item, and it is hard for even the same annotator to remain consistent when annotating a
large number of items. In contrast, it is easier for annotators to determine whether one word
is more positive (or more negative) than the other. However, the latter requires a much
larger number of annotations than the former (in the order of N 2, where N is the number
of items to be annotated). MaxDiﬀ is an annotation scheme that retains the comparative
743

--- PAGE 22 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
aspect of annotation while still requiring only a small number of annotations (Louviere,
1991).
The annotator is presented with four words and asked which word is the most positive
and which is the least positive. By answering just these two questions ﬁve out of the six
inequalities are known. Consider a set in which a respondent evaluates: A, B, C and D.
If the respondent says that A is most positive and D is least positive, these two responses
inform us that:
A > B, A > C, A > D, B > D, C > D
Each of these MaxDiﬀ questions can be presented to multiple annotators. The responses
to the MaxDiﬀ questions can then be easily translated into a ranking of all the terms and
also a real-valued score for all the terms (Orme, 2009). If two words have very diﬀerent
degrees of association (for example, A >> D ), then A will be chosen as most positive much
more often than D and D will be chosen as least positive much more often than A. This
will eventually lead to a ranked list such that A and D are signiﬁcantly farther apart, and
their real-valued association scores are also signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. On the other hand, if
two words have similar degrees of association with positive sentiment (for example, A and
B), then it is possible that for MaxDiﬀ questions having both A and B, some annotators
will choose A as most positive, and some will choose B as most positive. Further, both A
and B will be chosen as most positive (or most negative) a similar number of times. This
will result in a list such that A and B are ranked close to each other and their real-valued
association scores will also be close in value.
The MaxDiﬀ method is widely used in market survey questionnaires (Almquist & Lee,
2009). It was also used for determining relation similarity of pairs of items by Jurgens,
Mohammad, Turney, and Holyoak (2012) in a SemEval-2012 shared task.
Term selection: For the evaluation of the automatic lexicons, we selected 1,455 high-
frequency terms from the Sentiment140 Corpus and the Hashtag Sentiment Corpus. This
subset of terms includes regular English words, Twitter-speciﬁc terms (e.g., emoticons, ab-
breviations, creative spellings), and negated expressions. The terms were chosen as follows.
All terms from the corpora, excluding URLs, user mentions, stop words, and terms with
non-letter characters, were ordered by their frequency. To reduce the subset skew towards
the neutral class, terms were selected from diﬀerent ranges of sentiment values. For this,
the full range of sentiment values in the automatic lexicons was divided into 10 equal-size
bins. From each bin, naﬀ most frequent aﬃrmative terms and nneg most frequent negated
terms were selected to form the initial list.16. naﬀ was set to 200 and nneg was 50 for all the
bins except for the two middle bins that contain words with very weak association to senti-
ment (i.e., neutral words). For these two middle bins, naﬀ = 80 and nneg = 20. Then, the
initial list was manually examined, and ambiguous terms, rare abbreviations, and extremely
obscene words (243 terms) were removed. The resulting list was further augmented with
25 most frequent emoticons. The ﬁnal list of 1,455 terms contains 1,202 aﬃrmative terms
and 253 negated terms; there are 946 words found in WordNet and 509 out-of-dictionary
terms. Each negated term was presented to the annotators as a phrase ‘negator + term’,
16. Some bins may contain fewer than naﬀ aﬃrmative or fewer than nneg negated terms. In this case, all
available aﬃrmative/negated terms were selected.
744

--- PAGE 23 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
where the negator chosen was the most frequent negator for the term (e.g., ‘no respect’,
‘not acceptable’).
Annotation process: The term list was then converted into about 3,000 MaxDiﬀ
subsets with 4 terms each. The terms for the subsets were chosen randomly from the term
list. No duplicate terms were allowed in a subset, and each subset was unique. For each
MaxDiﬀ subset, annotators were asked to identify the term with the most association to
positive sentiment (i.e., the most positive term) and the term with the least association
to positive sentiment (i.e., the most negative term). Each subset was annotated by 10
annotators. For any given question, we will refer to the option chosen most often as the
majority answer . If a question is answered randomly by the annotators, then only 25%
of the annotators are expected to select the majority answer (as each question has four
options). In our task, we observed that the majority answer was selected by 72% of the
annotators on average.
The answers were then converted into scores using the counting procedure (Orme, 2009).
For each term, its score was calculated as the percentage of times the term was chosen as
the most positive minus the percentage of times the term was chosen as the most negative.
The scores were normalized to the range [0,1]. Even though annotators might disagree
about answers to individual questions, the aggregated scores produced with this counting
procedure and the corresponding term ranking are consistent. We veriﬁed this by randomly
dividing the sets of answers to each question into two groups and comparing the scores and
rankings obtained from these two groups of annotations. On average, the scores diﬀered
only by 0.04, and the Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient between the two sets of rankings
was 0.97. In the rest of the paper, we use the scores and term ranking produced from the full
set of annotations. We will refer to these scores as human annotated sentiment association
scores.
Comparing human annotated and automatic sentiment scores: The human
annotated scores are used to evaluate the sentiment scores in the automatically generated,
tweet-speciﬁc lexicons. The scores themselves are not very meaningful other than their
ability to rank terms in order of increasing (or decreasing) association with positive (or
negative) sentiment. If terms t1 and t2 are such that rank (t1 ) > rank (t2 ) as per both
rankings (human and automatic), then the term pair ( t1, t2) is considered to have the same
rank order.17 We measure the agreement between human and automatic sentiment rankings
by the percentage of term pairs for which the rank order is the same. 18
When two terms have a very similar degree of association with sentiment, then it
is more likely that humans will disagree with each other regarding their order. Simi-
larly, the greater the diﬀerence in true sentiment scores, the more likely that humans will
agree with each other regarding their order. Thus, we ﬁrst create several sets of term
pairs pertaining to various minimal diﬀerences in human sentiment scores, and calculate
agreement for each of these sets. Every set pairsk has all term pairs ( t1, t2) for which
Human Score (t1)̸= Human Score (t2) and |Human Score (t1)− Human Score (t2)| ≥k,
where k is varied from 0 to 0.8 in steps of 0.1. Thus, pairs0 includes all term pairs ( t1, t2)
for which Human Score (t1)̸= Human Score (t2). Similarly, pairs0 .1 includes all term pairs
for which|Human Score (t1)− Human Score (t2)|≥ 0.1, and so on. The agreement for a
17. One can swap t2 with t1 without loss of generality.
18. The measure of agreement we use is similar to Kendall’s tau rank correlation coeﬃcient.
745

--- PAGE 24 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
agreement 
min. abs. score difference 
HS Base Lexicon
S140 Base Lexicon
HS AffLex and HS NegLex
S140 AffLex and S140 NegLex
Figure 2: Agreement in pair order ranking between automatic lexicons and human annota-
tions. The agreement (y-axis) is measured as the percentage of term pairs with
the same rank order obtained from a lexicon and from human annotations. The
x-axis represents the minimal absolute diﬀerence in human annotated scores of
term pairs (k). The results for HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex are very close to the re-
sults for the HS Base Lexicon, and, therefore, the two curves are indistinguishable
in the graph.
given set pairsk is the percentage of term pairs in this set for which the rank order is the
same as per both human annotations and automatically generated scores. We expect higher
rank-order agreement for sets pertaining to higher k—sets with larger diﬀerence in human
(or true) scores. We plot the agreement between the human annotations and an automatic
lexicon as a function of k (x-axis) in Figure 2.
The agreement for pairs0 can be used as the bottom-line overall agreement score between
human annotations and the automatically generated scores. One can observe that the overall
agreement for all automatic lexicons is about 75–78%. The agreement curves monotonically
increase with the diﬀerence in human scores getting larger, eventually reaching 100%. The
monotonic increase is expected because as we move farther right along the x-axis, term pair
sets with a higher average diﬀerence in human scores are considered. This demonstrates
that the automatic sentiment lexicons correspond well with human intuition, especially on
term pairs with larger diﬀerence in human scores.
6.2 Extrinsic Evaluation of the Lexicons
6.2.1 Lexicon Performance in Unsupervised Sentiment Analysis
In this set of experiments, we evaluate the performance of each individual lexicon on the
message-level sentiment analysis task in unsupervised settings. No training and/or tuning
is performed. Since most of the lexicons provide the association scores for the positive and
negative classes only, in this subsection, we reduce the problem to a two-way classiﬁcation
task (positive or negative). The SemEval-2013 tweet test set and SMS test set are used for
evaluation. The neutral instances are removed from both datasets.
746

--- PAGE 25 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
To classify a message as positive or negative, we add up the scores for all matches in
a particular lexicon and assign a positive label if the cumulative score is greater than zero
and a negative label if the cumulative score is less than zero. Again, we use scores +1/-1 for
the NRC Emotion Lexicon and Bing Liu’s Lexicon and scores +1/-1 for weak associations
and +2/-2 for strong associations in the MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon. A message is left
unclassiﬁed when the score is equal to zero or when no matches are found.
Table 8 presents the results of unsupervised sentiment analysis for (1) manually cre-
ated, general-purpose lexicons (NRC Emotion Lexicon, Bing Liu’s Lexicon, and MPQA
Subjectivity Lexicon), (2) automatically created, general-purpose lexicons (SentiWordNet
3.0 (Baccianella, Esuli, & Sebastiani, 2010), MSOL (Mohammad et al., 2009), and Osgood
Evaluative Factor Ratings (Turney & Littman, 2003)), and (3) our automatically created,
tweet-speciﬁc lexicons (Hashtag Sentiment and Sentiment140 Lexicons). Only unigram
entries are used from each lexicon. The automatic general-purpose lexicons are large, open-
domain lexicons providing automatically generated sentiment scores for words taken from
hand-built general thesauri such as WordNet and Macquarie Thesaurus. 19 The predictive
performance is assessed through precision and recall on the positive and negative classes
as well as the macro-averaged F-score of the two classes. Observe that for most of the
lexicons, both precision and recall on the negative class are lower than on the positive class.
In particular, this holds for all the manual lexicons (rows a–c) despite the fact that they
have signiﬁcantly more negative terms than positive terms. One possible explanation for
this phenomenon is that people can express negative sentiment without using many or any
clearly negative words.
The threshold of zero seems natural for separating the positive and negative classes in
unsupervised polarity detection; however, better results are possible with other thresholds.
For example, predictions produced by the Osgood Evaluative Factor Ratings (rows f) are
highly skewed towards the positive class (recall of 95.42 on the positive class and 31.28
on the negative class), which negatively aﬀects its macro-averaged F-score. To avoid the
problem of setting the optimal threshold in unsupervised settings, we report the Area Under
the ROC curve (AUC), which takes into account the performance of the classiﬁer at all
possible thresholds (see the last column in Table 8). To calculate AUC, the cumulative
scores assigned by a lexicon to the test messages are ordered in the decreasing order. Then,
taking every score as a possible threshold, the true positive ratio is plotted against the false
positive ratio and the area under this curve is calculated. It has been shown that the AUC
of a classiﬁer is equivalent to the probability that the classiﬁer will rank a randomly chosen
positive instance higher than a randomly chosen negative instance. This is also equivalent
to the Wilcoxon test of ranks (Hanley & McNeil, 1982).
All automatically generated lexicons match at least one token in each test message while
the manual lexicons are unable to cover 10–20% of the tweet test set. Paying attention to
negation proves important for all general-purpose lexicons: both the macro-averaged F-
score and AUC are improved by 1–4 percentage points. However, this is not the case for
the Hashtag Sentiment Base (rows g) and the Sentiment140 Base Lexicons (rows k). The
polarity reversing strategy fails to improve over the simple baseline of disregarding negation
on these lexicons.
19. The SentiWordNet 3.0 has 30,821 unigrams, the MSOL Lexicon has 55,141 unigrams, and the Osgood
Evaluative Factor Ratings Lexicon contains ratings for 72,905 unigrams.
747

--- PAGE 26 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 8: Prediction performance of the unigram lexicons in unsupervised sentiment analysis
on the SemEval-2013 tweet test set. ‘Cover.’ denotes coverage – the percentage of
tweets in the test set with at least one match from the lexicon; P is precision; R
is recall; Favg is the macro-averaged F-score for the positive and negative classes;
AUC is the area under the ROC curve.
Lexicon Cover. Positive Negative Favg AUCP R P R
Manual general-purpose lexicons
a. NRC Emotion Lexicon
- disregarding negation 76.30 84.77 58.78 56.83 34.61 56.22 70.66
- reversing polarity 76.30 86.20 59.61 59.02 35.94 57.58 72.83
b. Bing Liu’s Lexicon
- disregarding negation 77.59 90.73 61.64 65.94 45.42 63.60 79.08
- reversing polarity 77.59 92.02 61.64 66.74 48.75 65.09 80.20
c. MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon
- disregarding negation 88.36 82.90 71.56 58.57 38.10 61.49 73.01
- reversing polarity 88.36 84.56 71.06 60.09 43.09 63.71 75.33
Automatic general-purpose lexicons
d. SentiWordNet 3.0
- disregarding negation 100.00 82.40 71.76 44.93 59.73 64.00 71.51
- reversing polarity 100.00 85.08 71.12 47.42 67.22 66.54 75.15
e. MSOL
- disregarding negation 100.00 77.18 74.43 38.66 27.79 54.06 63.44
- reversing polarity 100.00 77.35 74.30 41.70 30.95 55.66 63.80
f. Osgood Evaluative Factor Ratings
- disregarding negation 100.00 75.65 97.65 74.31 17.80 56.99 75.30
- reversing polarity 100.00 78.41 95.42 72.31 31.28 64.88 80.11
Automatic tweet-speciﬁc lexicons
g. HS Base Lexicon
- disregarding negation 100.00 89.15 72.65 51.79 76.87 70.97 82.52
- reversing polarity 100.00 88.03 72.07 50.45 74.38 69.69 80.21
h. HS AﬀLex
- disregarding negation 100.00 87.53 80.41 57.75 70.05 73.56 83.06
- reversing polarity 100.00 87.04 79.07 55.84 69.22 72.34 82.21
i. HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex 100.00 89.44 77.04 55.92 76.21 73.64 84.61
j. HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex (Posit.) 100.00 89.60 77.29 56.30 76.54 73.94 84.62
k. S140 Base Lexicon
- disregarding negation 100.00 88.60 77.61 55.78 73.88 73.15 84.47
- reversing polarity 100.00 87.78 77.23 54.68 71.88 72.14 83.21
l. S140 AﬀLex
- disregarding negation 100.00 85.96 86.45 64.02 63.06 74.87 84.94
- reversing polarity 100.00 87.19 85.31 63.56 67.05 75.75 86.04
m. S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex 100.00 89.65 83.21 63.03 74.88 77.37 86.88
n. S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex (Posit.) 100.00 89.79 83.33 63.31 75.21 77.59 87.14
- no tweet-speciﬁc entries 100.00 87.26 86.26 65.11 67.05 76.41 86.55
748

--- PAGE 27 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Compared to the Base Lexicons, the lexicons created only from aﬃrmative contexts
(rows h and l) are more precise and slightly improve the predictive performance. More
substantial improvements are obtained by adding the Negated Context Lexicons (rows i and
m). Furthermore, the Sentiment140 Negated Context (Positional) Lexicon (row n) oﬀers
additional gain of 0.26 percentage points in AUC over the regular Sentiment140 Negated
Context Lexicon (row m). Overall, the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and the Negated
Context (Positional) Lexicons outperform the Base Lexicons by over 2 percentage points in
AUC.
The automatically created general-purpose lexicons (rows d–f) have a substantially
higher coverage; however, they do not show better performance than the manual lexicons.
On the other hand, all our tweet-speciﬁc automatic lexicons demonstrate a predictive power
superior to that of both, the manually and automatically created, general-purpose lexicons.
The diﬀerences are especially pronounced for the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and the
Negated Context Lexicons. While keeping the level of precision close to that of the manual
lexicons, the automatic tweet-speciﬁc lexicons are able to substantially improve the recall
on both positive and negative classes. This increase in recall is particularly noticeable on
the negative class where the diﬀerences reach forty percentage points.
To investigate the impact of tweet-speciﬁc subset of the vocabulary (e.g., emoticons,
hashtags, misspellings) on the performance of the automatic lexicons, we conduct the same
experiments on a reduced lexicon. Terms that are not punctuation, numerals, or stop
words, and that are not found in WordNet have been removed from S140 AﬀLex and
S140 NegLex (Positional) Lexicons. The performance of the reduced lexicon (last row of
the table) drops about 0.6 percentage points in AUC demonstrating the value of tweet-
speciﬁc terms. Nevertheless, the results achieved with the subset of S140 AﬀLex and S140
NegLex (Positional) Lexicons are still superior to that obtained with any other automatic
or manual lexicon. This experiment suggests that the high-coverage automatic lexicons can
also be successfully employed as general-purpose sentiment lexicons and, therefore, applied
on other, non-tweet domains. In the next section, we show that the features derived from
these lexicons are extremely helpful in automatic sentiment analysis not only on tweets,
but also on SMS and movie review data. Furthermore, in (Kiritchenko et al., 2014) we
demonstrate the usefulness of the lexicons in the domains of restaurant and laptop customer
reviews.
In the unsupervised sentiment analysis experiments on the SMS test set (Table 9), one
can see trends similar to the ones observed on the tweet test set above. The automatic
lexicons built separately for aﬃrmative and negated contexts (rows i and m) perform 3–6
percentage points better than the corresponding Base Lexicons in combination with the po-
larity reversing strategy (rows g and k). Moreover, the use of the Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative
Context Lexicon and Negated Context (Positional) Lexicon (row n) again results in higher
performance than that obtained with any other manually or automatically created lexicon
we used.
To get a better understanding of the impact of the amount of data used to create an
automatic lexicon on the quality of the lexicon, we compare the performance of the auto-
matic lexicons built from subsets of the available data. We split a tweet corpus (Hashtag
Sentiment Corpus or Sentiment140 Corpus) into smaller chunks by the tweets’ time stamp.
Fig. 3 shows the performance of the Hashtag Sentiment Base, Hashtag Sentiment Aﬃrma-
749

--- PAGE 28 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 9: Prediction performance of the unigram lexicons in unsupervised sentiment analysis
on the SemEval-2013 SMS test set. The polarity reversing strategy is applied to
negation for all lexicons except for the Negated Context Lexicons. ‘Cover.’ denotes
coverage – the percentage of SMS in the test set with at least one match from the
lexicon; P is precision; R is recall; Favg is the macro-averaged F-score for the
positive and negative classes; AUC is the area under the ROC curve.
Lexicon Cover. Positive Negative Favg AUCP R P R
Manual general-purpose lexicons
a. NRC Emotion Lexicon 70.88 85.11 56.91 80.17 47.21 63.82 79.66
b. Bing Liu’s Lexicon 69.75 87.90 61.99 86.36 48.22 67.30 83.24
c. MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon 83.86 81.69 72.56 77.95 52.03 69.63 82.42
Automatic general-purpose lexicons
d. SentiWordNet 3.0 100.00 77.36 79.88 73.87 70.30 75.32 81.34
e. MSOL 100.00 69.88 73.58 69.14 44.92 63.07 72.49
f. Osgood Evaluative Factor Ratings 100.00 66.15 95.33 87.01 39.09 66.02 84.01
Automatic tweet-speciﬁc lexicons
g. HS Base Lexicon 100.00 88.41 41.87 56.20 93.15 63.47 75.49
i. HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex 100.00 92.03 46.95 58.90 94.92 67.44 81.67
j. HS AﬀLex and HS NegLex (Posit.) 100.00 92.00 46.75 58.81 94.92 67.31 82.05
k. S140 Base Lexicon 100.00 85.71 73.17 71.67 84.77 78.31 86.07
m. S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex 100.00 88.38 78.86 76.73 87.06 82.46 89.34
n. S140 AﬀLex and S140 NegLex (Posit.) 100.00 88.69 79.67 77.48 87.31 83.02 89.60
tive Context and Hashtag Sentiment Negated Context Lexicons, Sentiment140 Base, and
Sentiment140 Aﬃrmative Context and Sentiment140 Negated Context Lexicons built from
these partial corpora as a function of the corpus’ size. As above, the performance of the
lexicons is evaluated in terms of AUC in unsupervised sentiment analysis on the SemEval-
2013 tweet test set. We can see that the Sentiment140 Lexicons generated from half of the
available tweet set still have higher predictive power than the full Hashtag Sentiment Lexi-
cons. Interestingly, both Hashtag Sentiment Lexicons seem to stabilize at the corpus’ size
of 400,000–500,000 tweets whereas both Sentiment140 Lexicons stabilize at about 800,000
tweets. However, better results might still be possible with corpora that are orders of
magnitude larger.
6.2.2 Lexicon Performance in Supervised Sentiment Analysis
In this section, we evaluate our supervised sentiment analysis system (described in Sec-
tion 5) on a three-class problem (positive, negative, and neutral) on both the message-level
task and the term-level task. We use the data provided for the SemEval-2013 competition.
We examine the contribution of various feature groups, including the features derived from
the sentiment lexicons: manually created lexicons (NRC Emotion Lexicon, Bing Liu’s Lex-
icon, and MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon) and our automatically created lexicons (Hashtag
750

--- PAGE 29 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
84 
86 
88 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 
AUC 
# of tweets (millions) 
HS Base Lexicon 
S140 Base Lexicon 
HS AffLex and HS NegLex 
S140 AffLex and S140 NegLex 
Figure 3: Performance of the automatic tweet-speciﬁc lexicons in unsupervised sentiment
analysis on the SemEval-2013 tweet test set for diﬀerent sizes of the tweet corpora.
“AUC” denotes the Area Under the ROC Curve.
Sentiment and Sentiment140 Lexicons). Finally, we compare the performance of diﬀerent
strategies to process negation.
For both tasks, we train an SVM classiﬁer on the provided training data and evaluate the
performance of the learned models on an unseen tweet test set. The same models are applied,
without any change, to the test set of SMS messages. We evaluate the performance with the
bottom-line evaluation measure used by the organizers of the SemEval-2013 competition –
the macro-averaged F-score of the positive and negative classes:
Favg = Fpos + Fneg
2 (4)
Note that this measure does not give any credit for correctly classifying neutral instances.
Nevertheless, the system has to predict all three classes (positive, negative, and neutral) to
avoid being penalized for misclassifying neutral instances as positive or negative. We report
the results obtained by our system on the training set (ten-fold cross-validation), develop-
ment set (when trained on the training set), and test sets (when trained on the combined
set of tweets in the training and development sets). Signiﬁcance tests are performed using
a one-tailed paired t-test with approximate randomization at the p < . 05 level (Yeh, 2000).
In order to test our system on a diﬀerent domain, we conduct experiments on classifying
movie review sentences as positive or negative (message-level task only). We use the dataset
and the evaluation setup provided by Socher et al. (2013). We train the system on the
training and development subsets of the movie review excerpts dataset and apply the learned
model on the test subset. To compare with published results on this dataset, we use accuracy
as the evaluation measure.
6.2.3 Results for the Message-Level Task
(a) On the SemEval-2013 data: The results obtained by our system on the SemEval-
2013 message-level task are presented in Table 10. Our oﬃcial submission on this task
751

--- PAGE 30 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 10: Message-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores on the SemEval-2013 datasets.
Classiﬁer Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. Majority baseline 26.94 26.85 29.19 19.03
b. SVM-unigrams 36.95 36.71 39.61 39.29
c. Our system:
c.1. oﬃcial SemEval-2013 submission 67.09 68.72 69.02 68.46
c.2. best result 68.19 68.43 70.45 69.77
(row c.1) obtained a macro-averaged F-score of 69.02 on the tweet test set and 68.46 on
the SMS test set. Out of 48 submissions from 34 teams, our system ranked ﬁrst on both
datasets.20 After replacing the Base Lexicons with the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and
the Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons and with some improvements to the feature set,
we achieved the scores of 70.45 on the tweet set and 69.77 on the SMS set (row c.2). 21 The
diﬀerences between the best scores and the oﬃcial scores on both test sets are statistically
signiﬁcant. The table also shows the baseline results obtained by a majority classiﬁer that
always predicts the most frequent class (row a). The bottom-line F-score is based only
on the F-scores of the positive and negative classes (and not on neutral), so the majority
baseline chooses the most frequent class among positive and negative, which in this case
is the positive class. 22 We also include the baseline results obtained using an SVM and
unigram features alone (row b).
Table 11 shows the results of the ablation experiments where we repeat the same classi-
ﬁcation process but remove one feature group at a time. The most inﬂuential features turn
out to be the sentiment lexicon features (row b): they provide gains of 8–10 percentage
points on all SemEval-2013 datasets. Note that the contribution of the automatic tweet-
speciﬁc lexicons (row b.2) substantially exceeds the contribution of the manual lexicons
(row b.1). This is especially noticeable on the tweet test set where the use of the automatic
lexicons results in improvement of 6.5 percentage points. Also, the use of bigrams and
non-contiguous pairs (row b.5) bring additional gains over using only the unigram lexicons.
The second most important feature group for the message-level task is ngrams (row c):
word ngrams and character ngrams. Part-of-speech tagging (row d) and clustering (row
e) provide only small improvements. Also, removing the sentiment encoding features like
hashtags, emoticons, and elongated words (row f) has little impact on performance, but
this is probably because the discriminating information in them is also captured by some
other features such as character and word ngrams.
Next, we compare the diﬀerent strategies of processing negation (Table 12). Observe
that processing negation beneﬁts the overall sentiment analysis system: all methods we test
20. The second-best results were 65.27 on the tweet set and 62.15 on the SMS set.
21. The contributions of the diﬀerent versions of the automatic lexicons to the overall system’s performance
are presented later in this subsection.
22. The majority baseline is calculated as follows. Since all instances are predicted as positive, Fneg = 0,
Rpos = 1, and Ppos = Npos/N, where Npos is the number of positive instances and N is the total number
of instances in the dataset. Then, the macro-averaged F-score of the positive and negative classes Favg
= (Fpos + Fneg)/2 = Fpos/2 = ( Ppos * Rpos)/(Ppos + Rpos) = Ppos/(Ppos + 1) = Npos/(Npos + N).
752

--- PAGE 31 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 11: Message-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores obtained on the SemEval-2013
datasets when one of the feature groups is removed. Scores marked with * are
statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < . 05) from the corresponding scores in row
a.
Experiment Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. all features 68.19 68.43 70.45 69.77
b. all - lexicons 60.08* 58.98* 60.51* 59.94*
b.1. all - manual lexicons 66.59* 66.24* 69.52* 67.26*
b.2. all - automatic lexicons 65.17* 64.15* 63.89* 66.46*
b.3. all - Sentiment140 Lexicons 66.84* 66.80* 66.58* 67.61*
b.4. all - Hashtag Sentiment Lexicons 67.65* 67.82 67.64* 71.16*
b.5. all - automatic lexicons of bigrams
& non-contiguous pairs 67.65* 66.84 67.44* 69.42
c. all - ngrams 64.07* 65.68* 67.49* 66.93*
c.1. all - word ngrams 66.64* 66.70* 68.29* 67.64*
c.2. all - character ngrams 67.64* 68.28 68.74* 69.11
d. all - POS 67.54* 67.64 70.47 68.42*
e. all - clusters 68.21* 68.33 70.00 68.56*
f. all - encodings (elongated, emoticons,
punctuations, all-caps, hashtags) 67.99* 68.66 70.79 69.82
outperform the baseline of disregarding negation (row a.1). Employing the Aﬃrmative Con-
text Lexicons and the Negated Context Lexicons (row b) provides substantial improvement
over the standard polarity reversing strategy on the Base Lexicons (row a.2). Replacing the
Negated Context Lexicons with the Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons (row c) results
in some additional gains for the system.
(b) On the Movie Reviews data: The results obtained using our system on the
movie review excerpts dataset is shown in Table 13. Our system, trained on the sentence-
level annotations of the training and development subsets, is able to correctly classify 85.5%
of the test subset. Note that we ignore the annotations on the word and phrase level as
well as the parse tree structure used by Socher et al. (2013). Even on a non-tweet domain,
employing the automatically generated, tweet-speciﬁc lexicons signiﬁcantly improves the
overall performance: without the use of these lexicons, the performance drops to 83.9%.
Furthermore, our system demonstrates the state-of-the-art performance surpassing the pre-
vious best result obtained on this dataset (Socher et al., 2013).
6.2.4 Results for the Term-level Task
Table 14 shows the performance of our sentiment analysis system on the SemEval-2013
term-level task. Our oﬃcial submission (row c.1) obtained a macro-averaged F-score of
88.93 on the tweet set and was ranked ﬁrst among 29 submissions from 23 participating
753

--- PAGE 32 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 12: Message-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores on the Semeval-2013 datasets
for diﬀerent negation processing strategies. Scores marked with * are statistically
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < . 05) from the corresponding scores in row c (our best
result).
Experiment Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. Base automatic lexicons
a.1. disregarding negation 66.62* 67.36 67.99* 65.29*
a.2. reversing polarity 67.61* 68.04 68.95* 66.96*
b. AﬀLex and NegLex 68.13* 68.41 69.95* 69.59
c. AﬀLex and NegLex (Positional) 68.19 68.43 70.45 69.77
Table 13: Message-level task: The results obtained on the movie review excerpts dataset.
System Accuracy
a. Majority baseline 50.1
b. SVM-unigrams 71.9
c. Previous best result (Socher et al., 2013) 85.4
d. Our system 85.5
teams.23 Even with no tuning speciﬁc to SMS data, our system ranked second on the SMS
test set with an F-score of 88.00. The score of the ﬁrst ranking system on the SMS set was
88.39. A post-competition bug-ﬁx and the use of the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and the
Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons resulted in F-score of 89.50 on the tweets set and
88.20 on the SMS set (row c.2). The diﬀerence between the best score and the oﬃcial score
on the tweet test set is statistically signiﬁcant. The table also shows the baseline results
obtained by a majority classiﬁer that always predicts the most frequent class as output (row
a), and an additional baseline result obtained using an SVM and unigram features alone
(row b).
Table 15 presents the results of the ablation experiments where feature groups are al-
ternately removed from the ﬁnal model. Observe that the sentiment lexicon features (row
b) are again the most useful group—removing them leads to a drop in F-score of 4–5 per-
centage points on all datasets. Both manual (row b.1) and automatic (row b.2) lexicons
contribute signiﬁcantly to the overall sentiment analysis system, with the automatic lexicons
consistently showing larger gains.
The ngram features (row c) are the next most useful group on the term-level task. Note
that removing just the word ngram features (row c.1) or just the character ngram features
(row c.2) results in only a small drop in performance. This indicates that the two feature
groups capture similar information.
The last two rows in Table 15 show the results obtained when the features are extracted
only from the context of the target (and not from the target itself) (row f) and when they
are extracted only from the target (and not from its context) (row g). Observe that even
23. The second-best system that used no additional labeled data obtained the score of 86.98 on the tweet
test set.
754

--- PAGE 33 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Table 14: Term-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores on the SemEval-2013 datasets.
Classiﬁer Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. Majority baseline 38.38 36.34 38.13 32.11
b. SVM-unigrams 78.04 79.76 80.28 78.71
c. Our system:
c.1. oﬃcial SemEval-2013 submission 86.80 86.49 88.93 88.00
c.2. best result 87.03 87.07 89.50 88.20
Table 15: Term-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores obtained on the SemEval-2013
datasets when one of the feature groups is removed. Scores marked with * are
statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < . 05) from the corresponding scores in row
a.
Experiment Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. all features 87.03 87.07 89.50 88.20
b. all - lexicons 82.77* 81.75* 85.56* 83.52*
b.1. all - manual lexicons 86.16* 86.22 88.21* 87.27*
b.2. all - automatic lexicons 85.28* 85.66* 88.02* 86.39*
c. all - ngrams 84.08* 84.94* 85.73* 82.94*
c.1. all - word ngrams 86.65* 86.30 88.51* 87.02*
c.2. all - char. ngrams 86.67* 87.58 89.20 87.15*
d. all - stopwords 87.07* 87.08 89.42* 88.07*
e. all - encodings (elongated words, emoticons,
punctuation, uppercase) 87.11 87.08 89.44 88.17
f. all - target 72.65* 71.72* 74.12* 69.37*
g. all - context 83.76* 83.95* 85.56* 86.63*
though the target features are substantially more useful than the context features, adding
the context features to the system improves the F-scores by roughly 2 to 4 points.
The performance of the sentiment analysis system is signiﬁcantly higher in the term-level
task than in the message-level task. The diﬀerence in performance on these two tasks can
also be observed for the SVM-unigrams baseline. We analyzed the provided labeled data
to determine why unigrams performed so strongly in the term-level task, and found that
most of the test target tokens (85.1%) occur as target tokens in the training data. Further,
the distribution of occurrences of a target term in diﬀerent polarities is skewed towards one
polarity or other. On average, a word appears in target phrases of the same polarity 80.8%
of the time. These facts explain, at least in part, the high overall result and the dominant
role of unigrams in the term-level task. To evaluate the impact of diﬀerent feature groups
on the test data with unseen target terms, we split the SemEval-2013 tweet test set into
three subsets. Every instance in the ﬁrst subset, “targets fully seen in training”, has a
target X (X can be a single word or a multi-word expression) with the following property:
there exist instances in the training data with exactly the same target. The ﬁrst subset
755

--- PAGE 34 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Table 16: Term-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores obtained on the diﬀerent subsets
of the SemEval-2013 tweet test set with one of the feature groups removed. The
number in brackets is the diﬀerence with the scores in row a. Scores marked with
* are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ( p < . 05) from the corresponding scores
in row a.
Classiﬁer Targets Targets Targets
fully seen partially seen unseen
in training in training in training
a. all features 93.31 85.42 84.09
b. all - lexicons 92.96 (-0.35) 81.26 (-4.16)* 69.55 (-14.54)*
b.1. all - manual lexicons 92.94 (-0.37) 84.51 (-0.91) 79.33 (-4.76)*
b.2. all - automatic lexicons 92.98 (-0.33) 84.08 (-1.34) 79.41 (-4.68)*
c. all - ngrams 89.30 (-4.01)* 81.61 (-3.81)* 80.62 (-3.47)*
Table 17: Term-level task: The macro-averaged F-scores on the SemEval-2013 datasets for
diﬀerent negation processing strategies. Scores marked with * are statistically
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < . 05) from the corresponding scores in row c (our best
result).
Experiment Train. Dev. Test Sets
Set Set Tweets SMS
a. Base automatic lexicons
a.1. disregarding negation 85.88* 86.37* 88.38* 86.77*
a.2. reversing polarity 86.85 86.48* 89.10* 88.34
b. AﬀLex and NegLex 86.89 86.60* 89.33 87.89
c. AﬀLex and NegLex (Positional) 87.03 87.07 89.50 88.20
comprises 55% of the test set. Every instance in the second subset, “targets partially seen in
training”, has a target X with the following property: there exist instances in the training
data whose target expression includes one or more, but not all, tokens in X. The second
subset comprises 31% of the test set. Every instance in the third subset, “targets unseen
in training”, has a target X with the following property: there are no instances in the
training data whose target includes any of the tokens in X. The third subset comprises
14% of the test set. Table 16 shows the results of the ablation experiments on these three
subsets. Observe that on the instances with unseen targets the sentiment lexicons play a
more prominent role, providing a substantial gain (14.54 percentage points).
In the next set of experiments, we compare the performance of diﬀerent approaches
to negation handling on the term-level task (Table 17). Similar to the message-level task,
processing negation proves beneﬁcial on the term-level task as well. All tested negation
processing approaches show better results than the default strategy of disregarding negation
(row a.1). The use of the Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and the Negated Context Lexicons
(row b) and especially the Negated Context (Positional) Lexicons (row c) provides additional
gains over the results obtained through the use of the polarity reversing method (row a.2).
756

--- PAGE 35 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
7. Conclusions
We created a supervised statistical sentiment analysis system that detects the sentiment of
short informal textual messages such as tweets and SMS (message-level task) as well as the
sentiment of a term (a word or a phrase) within a message (term-level task). The system
ranked ﬁrst in both tasks at the SemEval-2013 competition ‘Sentiment Analysis in Twitter’.
Moreover, it demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance on two additional datasets: the
SemEval-2013 SMS test set and a corpus of movie review excerpts.
In this system, we implemented a variety of features based on surface form and lexical
categories. We also included features derived from several sentiment lexicons: (1) existing,
manually created, general-purpose lexicons and (2) high-coverage, tweet-speciﬁc lexicons
that we generated from tweets with sentiment-word hashtags and from tweets with emoti-
cons. Our experiments showed that the new tweet-speciﬁc lexicons are superior in sentiment
prediction on tweets in both unsupervised and supervised settings.
Processing negation plays an important role in sentiment analysis. Many previous stud-
ies adopted a simple technique to reverse polarity of words in the scope of negation. In
this work, we demonstrated that this polarity reversing method may not be always ap-
propriate. In particular, we showed that when positive terms are negated, they tend to
convey a negative sentiment. In contrast, when negative terms are negated, they tend to
still convey a negative sentiment. Furthermore, the evaluative intensity for both positive
and negative terms changes in a negated context, and the amount of change varies from
term to term. To adequately capture the impact of negation on individual terms, we pro-
posed to empirically estimate the sentiment scores of terms in negated context from large
tweet corpora, and built two lexicons, one for terms in negated contexts and one for terms
in aﬃrmative (non-negated) contexts. By using these Aﬃrmative Context Lexicons and
Negated Context Lexicons we were able to signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the
overall sentiment analysis system on both tasks. In particular, the features derived from
these lexicons provided gains of up to 6.5 percentage points over the other feature groups.
Our system can process 100 tweets in a second. Thus, it is suitable for small- and big-
data versions of applications listed in the introduction. We recently annotated 135 million
tweets over a cluster of 50 machines in 11 hours. We have already employed the senti-
ment analysis system within larger systems for detecting intentions behind political tweets
(Mohammad, Kiritchenko, & Martin, 2013), for detecting emotions in text (Mohammad &
Kiritchenko, 2014), and for detecting sentiment towards particular aspects of target entities
(Kiritchenko et al., 2014). We are also interested in applying and evaluating the lexicons
generated from tweets on data from other kinds of text such as blogs and news articles.
In addition, we plan to adapt our sentiment analysis system to languages other than En-
glish. Along the way, we continue to improve the sentiment lexicons by generating them
from larger amounts of data, and from diﬀerent kinds of data, such as tweets, blogs, and
Facebook posts. We are especially interested in algorithms that gracefully handle all kinds
of sentiment modiﬁers including not only negations, but also intensiﬁers (e.g., very, hardly),
and discourse connectives (e.g., but, however).
757

--- PAGE 36 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Acknowledgments
We thank Colin Cherry for providing his SVM code and for helpful discussions.
References
Agarwal, A., Xie, B., Vovsha, I., Rambow, O., & Passonneau, R. (2011). Sentiment analysis
of twitter data. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages in Social Media , LSM
’11, pp. 30–38, Portland, Oregon.
Aisopos, F., Papadakis, G., Tserpes, K., & Varvarigou, T. (2012). Textual and contextual
patterns for sentiment analysis over microblogs. In Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
national Conference on World Wide Web Companion , WWW ’12 Companion, pp.
453–454, New York, NY, USA.
Almquist, E., & Lee, J. (2009). What do customers really want?. Harvard Business Review.
Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2010). SentiWordNet 3.0: an enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In Proceeding of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation , Vol. 10 of LREC ’10 , pp.
2200–2204.
Bakliwal, A., Arora, P., Madhappan, S., Kapre, N., Singh, M., & Varma, V. (2012). Min-
ing sentiments from tweets. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis , WASSA ’12, pp. 11–18, Jeju, Re-
public of Korea.
Becker, L., Erhart, G., Skiba, D., & Matula, V. (2013). Avaya: Sentiment analysis on
twitter with self-training and polarity lexicon expansion. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013) , pp. 333–340, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
Bellegarda, J. (2010). Emotion analysis using latent aﬀective folding and embedding. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , Los Angeles, California.
Boucher, J. D., & Osgood, C. E. (1969). The Pollyanna Hypothesis. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 8, 1–8.
Boucouvalas, A. C. (2002). Real time text-to-emotion engine for expressive internet com-
munication. Emerging Communication: Studies on New Technologies and Practices
in Communication, 5, 305–318.
Brody, S., & Diakopoulos, N. (2011). Cooooooooooooooollllllllllllll!!!!!!!!!!!!!!: using word
lengthening to detect sentiment in microblogs. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , EMNLP ’11, pp. 562–570,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Chang, C.-C., & Lin, C.-J. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 2(3), 27:1–27:27.
Choi, Y., & Cardie, C. (2008). Learning with compositional semantics as structural inference
for subsentential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’08, pp. 793–801.
758

--- PAGE 37 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Choi, Y., & Cardie, C. (2010). Hierarchical sequential learning for extracting opinions
and their attributes. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’10, pp. 269–274.
Davidov, D., Tsur, O., & Rappoport, A. (2010). Enhanced sentiment learning using Twit-
ter hashtags and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Posters , COLING ’10, pp. 241–249, Beijing, China.
Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2006). SENTIWORDNET: A publicly available lexical resource
for opinion mining. In In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC ’06, pp. 417–422.
Francisco, V., & Gerv´ as, P. (2006). Automated mark up of aﬀective information in English
texts. In Sojka, P., Kopecek, I., & Pala, K. (Eds.), Text, Speech and Dialogue , Vol.
4188 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 375–382. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Genereux, M., & Evans, R. P. (2006). Distinguishing aﬀective states in weblogs. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing
Weblogs, pp. 27–29, Stanford, California.
Gimpel, K., Schneider, N., O’Connor, B., Das, D., Mills, D., Eisenstein, J., Heilman, M.,
Yogatama, D., Flanigan, J., & Smith, N. A. (2011). Part-of-speech tagging for Twitter:
Annotation, features, and experiments. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , ACL ’11.
Go, A., Bhayani, R., & Huang, L. (2009). Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation using distant
supervision. Tech. rep., Stanford University.
Hanley, J., & McNeil, B. (1982). The meaning and use of the area under a Receiver Oper-
ating Characteristic (ROC) curve. Radiology, 143, 29–36.
Hatzivassiloglou, V., & McKeown, K. R. (1997). Predicting the semantic orientation of ad-
jectives. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference of European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , EACL ’97, pp. 174–181, Madrid, Spain.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, KDD ’04, pp. 168–177, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Jia, L., Yu, C., & Meng, W. (2009). The eﬀect of negation on sentiment analysis and
retrieval eﬀectiveness. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management , CIKM ’09, pp. 1827–1830, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Jiang, L., Yu, M., Zhou, M., Liu, X., & Zhao, T. (2011). Target-dependent Twitter senti-
ment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’11, pp. 151–160.
Johansson, R., & Moschitti, A. (2013). Relational features in ﬁne-grained opinion analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 39(3), 473–509.
John, D., Boucouvalas, A. C., & Xu, Z. (2006). Representing emotional momentum within
expressive internet communication. In Proceedings of the 24th International Confer-
ence on Internet and Multimedia Systems and Applications , pp. 183–188, Anaheim,
CA. ACTA Press.
759

--- PAGE 38 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Jurgens, D., Mohammad, S. M., Turney, P., & Holyoak, K. (2012). Semeval-2012 task 2:
Measuring degrees of relational similarity. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , SemEval ’12, pp. 356–364, Montr´ eal, Canada.
Kennedy, A., & Inkpen, D. (2005). Sentiment classiﬁcation of movie and product reviews
using contextual valence shifters. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Analysis
of Informal and Formal Information Exchange during Negotiations , Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
Kennedy, A., & Inkpen, D. (2006). Sentiment classiﬁcation of movie reviews using contextual
valence shifters. Computational Intelligence, 22(2), 110–125.
Kiritchenko, S., Zhu, X., Cherry, C., & Mohammad, S. M. (2014). NRC-Canada-2014: De-
tecting aspects and sentiment in customer reviews. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , SemEval ’14, Dublin, Ireland.
Kouloumpis, E., Wilson, T., & Moore, J. (2011). Twitter sentiment analysis: The Good
the Bad and the OMG!. In Proceedings of the 5th International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media .
Lapponi, E., Read, J., & Ovrelid, L. (2012). Representing and resolving negation for senti-
ment analysis. In Vreeken, J., Ling, C., Zaki, M. J., Siebes, A., Yu, J. X., Goethals,
B., Webb, G. I., & Wu, X. (Eds.), ICDM Workshops , pp. 687–692. IEEE Computer
Society.
Li, J., Zhou, G., Wang, H., & Zhu, Q. (2010). Learning the scope of negation via shallow se-
mantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING ’10, pp. 671–679, Beijing, China.
Liu, B., & Zhang, L. (2012). A survey of opinion mining and sentiment analysis. In
Aggarwal, C. C., & Zhai, C. (Eds.), Mining Text Data, pp. 415–463. Springer US.
Liu, H., Lieberman, H., & Selker, T. (2003). A model of textual aﬀect sensing using real-
world knowledge. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces, IUI ’03, pp. 125–132, New York, NY. ACM.
Louviere, J. J. (1991). Best-worst scaling: A model for the largest diﬀerence judgments.
Working Paper.
Mart´ ınez-C´ amara, E., Mart´ ın-Valdivia, M. T., Ure˜ nal´ opez, L. A., & Montejor´ aez, A. R.
(2012). Sentiment analysis in Twitter. Natural Language Engineering, 1–28.
Mihalcea, R., & Liu, H. (2006). A corpus-based approach to ﬁnding happiness. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing
Weblogs, pp. 139–144. AAAI Press.
Mohammad, S. M. (2012). #Emotional tweets. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics , *SEM ’12, pp. 246–255, Montr´ eal, Canada.
Mohammad, S. M., Dunne, C., & Dorr, B. (2009). Generating high-coverage semantic
orientation lexicons from overtly marked words and a thesaurus. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 2, EMNLP
’09, pp. 599–608.
760

--- PAGE 39 ---
Sentiment Analysis of Short Informal Texts
Mohammad, S. M., & Kiritchenko, S. (2014). Using hashtags to capture ﬁne emotion
categories from tweets. To appear in Computational Intelligence .
Mohammad, S. M., Kiritchenko, S., & Martin, J. (2013). Identifying purpose behind elec-
toral tweets. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Issues of Sentiment
Discovery and Opinion Mining , WISDOM ’13, pp. 1–9.
Mohammad, S. M., & Turney, P. D. (2010). Emotions evoked by common words and
phrases: Using Mechanical Turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the
NAACL-HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation
of Emotion in Text , LA, California.
Mohammad, S. M., & Yang, T. W. (2011). Tracking sentiment in mail: How genders diﬀer on
emotional axes. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis , WASSA ’11, Portland, OR, USA.
Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H., & Ishizuka, M. (2011). Aﬀect analysis model: novel
rule-based approach to aﬀect sensing from text. Natural Language Engineering , 17,
95–135.
Orme, B. (2009). Maxdiﬀ analysis: Simple counting, individual-level logit, and HB. Saw-
tooth Software, Inc.
Pak, A., & Paroubek, P. (2010). Twitter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on International Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC ’10, Valletta, Malta.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis.Foundations and Trends
in Information Retrieval , 2(1–2), 1–135.
Pang, B., Lee, L., & Vaithyanathan, S. (2002). Thumbs up?: Sentiment classiﬁcation using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’02, pp. 79–86, Philadelphia, PA.
Polanyi, L., & Zaenen, A. (2004). Contextual valence shifters. In Exploring Attitude and
Aﬀect in Text: Theories and Applications (AAAI Spring Symposium Series) .
Porter, M. (1980). An algorithm for suﬃx stripping. Program, 3, 130–137.
Proisl, T., Greiner, P., Evert, S., & Kabashi, B. (2013). Klue: Simple and robust methods for
polarity classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013) , pp. 395–401, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Reckman, H., Baird, C., Crawford, J., Crowell, R., Micciulla, L., Sethi, S., & Veress, F.
(2013). teragram: Rule-based detection of sentiment phrases using sas sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2013), pp. 513–519, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Sauper, C., & Barzilay, R. (2013). Automatic aggregation by joint modeling of aspects and
values. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 46, 89–127.
Socher, R., Huval, B., Manning, C. D., & Ng, A. Y. (2012). Semantic compositionality
through recursive matrix-vector spaces. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’12, Jeju, Korea.
761

--- PAGE 40 ---
Kiritchenko, Zhu, & Mohammad
Socher, R., Perelygin, A., Wu, J. Y., Chuang, J., Manning, C. D., Ng, A. Y., & Potts,
C. (2013). Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP ’13, Seattle, USA.
Stone, P., Dunphy, D. C., Smith, M. S., Ogilvie, D. M., & associates (1966). The General
Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis . The MIT Press.
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Toﬁloski, M., Voll, K., & Stede, M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods
for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2), 267–307.
Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., & Paltoglou, G. (2011). Sentiment in Twitter events. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 62(2), 406–418.
Turney, P. (2001). Mining the web for synonyms: PMI-IR versus LSA on TOEFL. In
Proceedings of the Twelfth European Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 491–502,
Freiburg, Germany.
Turney, P., & Littman, M. L. (2003). Measuring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 21(4).
Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., & Cardie, C. (2005). Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions
in language. Language resources and evaluation, 39(2-3), 165–210.
Wiegand, M., Balahur, A., Roth, B., Klakow, D., & Montoyo, A. (2010). A survey on the
role of negation in sentiment analysis. InProceedings of the Workshop on Negation and
Speculation in Natural Language Processing, NeSp-NLP ’10, pp. 60–68, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA.
Wilson, T., Kozareva, Z., Nakov, P., Rosenthal, S., Stoyanov, V., & Ritter, A. (2013).
SemEval-2013 Task 2: Sentiment analysis in Twitter. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , SemEval ’13, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., & Hoﬀmann, P. (2005). Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Language Tech-
nology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, HLT ’05, pp. 347–354,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Yang, B., & Cardie, C. (2013). Joint inference for ﬁne-grained opinion extraction. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
ACL ’13.
Yeh, A. (2000). More accurate tests for the statistical signiﬁcance of result diﬀerences. In
Proceedings of the 18th conference on Computational linguistics - Volume 2, COLING
’00, pp. 947–953, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
762