--- PAGE 1 ---
Happy Accident: A Sentiment Composition Lexicon
for Opposing Polarity Phrases
Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad
National Research Council Canada
1200 Montreal Rd., Ottawa, ON, Canada
svetlana.kiritchenko@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca, saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Abstract
Sentiment composition is the determining of sentiment of a multi-word linguistic unit, such as a phrase or a sentence, based on its
constituents. We focus on sentiment composition in phrases formed by at least one positive and at least one negative word—phrases
like happy accident and best winter break. We refer to such phrases as opposing polarity phrases. We manually annotate a collection of
opposing polarity phrases and their constituent single words with real-valued sentiment intensity scores using a method known as Best–
Worst Scaling. We show that the obtained annotations are consistent. We explore the entries in the lexicon for linguistic regularities that
govern sentiment composition in opposing polarity phrases. Finally, we list the current and possible future applications of the lexicon.
Keywords: sentiment composition, sentiment lexicon, opposing polarity phrases, Best–Worst Scaling, crowdsourcing
1. Introduction
Words have associations with sentiment. For example,hon-
est and competent are associated with positive sentiment,
whereas dishonest and dull are associated with negative
sentiment. Further, the degree of positivity (or negativity),
also referred to as sentiment intensity, can vary. For exam-
ple, most people will agree thatsucceed is more positive (or
less negative) thanimprove, and failure is more negative (or
less positive) than decline.
Sentiment associations are commonly captured in senti-
ment lexicons —lists of associated word–sentiment pairs
(optionally with a score indicating the degree of associa-
tion). They are mostly used in sentiment analysis, but are
also valuable in stance detection (Mohammad et al., 2016a;
Mohammad et al., 2016b), literary analysis (Hartner, 2013;
Kleres, 2011), and other applications.
Manually created sentiment lexicons usually include only
single words. However, the sentiment of a phrase can differ
signiﬁcantly from the sentiment of its constituent words.
Sentiment composition is the determining of sentiment of
a multi-word linguistic unit, such as a phrase or a sen-
tence, based on its constituents. Lexicons that include sen-
timent associations for phrases as well as their constituent
words can be very useful in studying sentiment composi-
tion. We will refer to them as sentiment composition lexi-
cons (SCLs).
In this work, we focus on sentiment composition in phrases
that include at least one positive and at least one negative
word—for example, phrases such as happy accident, best
winter break, couldn’t stop smiling, and lazy sundays.1 We
refer to them as opposing polarity phrases . We describe
how we created a sentiment composition lexicon for op-
posing polarity phrases and their constituent words.
Most existing manually created sentiment lexicons provide
only lists of positive and negative words with very coarse
levels of sentiment (Stone et al., 1966; Wilson et al., 2005;
Mohammad and Turney, 2013). The coarse-grained distinc-
tions may be less useful in downstream applications than
1Observe that lazy is associated with negative sentiment
whereas sundays is associated with positive sentiment.
having access to ﬁne-grained (real-valued) sentiment asso-
ciation scores (Taboada et al., 2011). However, obtaining
real-valued sentiment annotations is challenging for sev-
eral reasons. Respondents are faced with a higher cogni-
tive load when asked for real-valued sentiment scores for
terms as opposed to simply classifying terms as either pos-
itive or negative. Further, it is difﬁcult for an annotator to
remain consistent with his/her annotations. One could over-
come these problems by providing annotators with pairs of
terms and asking which is more positive (a comparative ap-
proach), however that requires a much larger set of annota-
tions (order of N 2, where N is the number of terms to be
annotated).
Here, in contrast to most previous work on sentiment anno-
tation, we create a lexicon that provides real-valued scores
of association of a phrase with positive sentiment. For this,
we employ the Best–Worst Scaling method of annotation,
which is commonly used in marketing research (Louviere
and Woodworth, 1990). It exploits the comparative ap-
proach to annotation while keeping the number of anno-
tations small. When applied on the task of sentiment anno-
tation, Best–Worst Scaling has been shown to produce re-
markably consistent annotations of terms (Kiritchenko and
Mohammad, 2016a).
In this paper, we describe how we compiled real-valued
sentiment association scores for opposing polarity phrases
and their constituents through Best-Worst Scaling. We re-
fer to this resource as the Sentiment Composition Lexicon
for Opposing Polarity Phrases (SCL-OPP). The lexicon in-
cludes entries for 265 trigrams, 311 bigrams, and 602 uni-
grams. We show that re-doing the annotation with different
sets of annotators produces consistent rankings of terms by
sentiment, proving that the obtained sentiment scores are
reliable.
We explore the entries in SCL-OPP in search for linguistic
regularities that govern the sentiment composition in op-
posing polarity phrases. We also show the frequency dis-
tribution of opposing polarity phrases pertaining to various
part-of-speech sequences. The most common sequence in
our dataset is ‘Adjective + Noun’. We observe that adjec-
1157

--- PAGE 2 ---
tives and verbs are frequently the primary source of senti-
ment in the phrase; however, some nouns can override their
sentiment, as in new crisis or leave a #smile. Overall, sen-
timent composition for many part-of-speech sequences is
not straightforward, and SCL-OPP has phrases correspond-
ing to many different cases. In related work (not described
here), we also created a sentiment composition lexicon for
negators, modals, and adverbs (SCL-NMA). We refer the
readers to (Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2016b) for more
details on that lexicon. Lexicons such as SCL-OPP and
SCL-NMA, which include entries for phrases as well as
their constituents, are useful in understanding how meaning
(especially sentiment) is composed. They are made freely
available to the research community.2
2. Related Work
Sentiment Lexicons: There exist a number of manually
created lexicons that provide lists of positive and negative
words, for example, General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966),
Hu and Liu Lexicon (Hu and Liu, 2004), MPQA Subjectiv-
ity Lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005), and NRC Emotion Lex-
icon (Mohammad and Turney, 2013). Only a few manu-
ally created lexicons provide real-valued scores for senti-
ment. ANEW is a collection of 1,034 English words man-
ually rated for valence, arousal, and dominance using a 9-
point rating scale (Bradley and Lang, 1999). Warriner et al.
(2013) extended this list to include 13,915 English lemmas,
again manually rated for valence, arousal, and dominance
on a 9-point scale. In a similar way, the LabMT lexicon
was created (Dodds et al., 2011). It provides real-valued
estimates of association of English single words with happi-
ness. Later, the lexicon was extended to include frequently
used words from ten languages (Dodds et al., 2015). None
of these lexicons, however, contain multi-word phrases.
Manually created sentiment lexicons can be used to auto-
matically generate larger sentiment lexicons using semi-
supervised techniques (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006; Turney
and Littman, 2003; Mohammad et al., 2013). Automat-
ically collected lexicons often have real-valued sentiment
association scores, are larger in scale, and can easily be col-
lected for a speciﬁc domain; therefore, they are often more
beneﬁcial in downstream applications, such as sentence-
level sentiment prediction (Kiritchenko et al., 2014). Yet,
their intrinsic evaluation has been limited due to the lack of
manually created real-valued sentiment lexicons. Further,
any analysis of the relationship between the sentiment of a
phrase and its constituents is less reliable when made from
an automatically generated resource as opposed to when
made from a manually created resource (as automatically
generated resources are less accurate). In this work, we
create a ﬁne-grained sentiment composition lexicon for op-
posing polarity phrases through manual annotation.
Annotation techniques: A widely used method of anno-
tation for obtaining numerical scores is the rating scale
method—where an annotator is asked to rate an item on
a ﬁve-, ten-, or hundred-point scale. While easy to under-
stand, rating items on a scale is not natural for people. Dif-
ferent people may assign different scores to the same target
2http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html
item, and it is hard for annotators to remain consistent when
annotating a large number of items. Also, respondents can
mark many terms as equally positive making the annota-
tions less useful. Furthermore, respondents often use just
a limited part of the scale providing a bias and reducing
the discrimination among items. To obtain reliable anno-
tations, the rating scale methods require a high number of
responses, typically 15 to 20 (Warriner et al., 2013; Graham
et al., 2015).
A more natural annotation task for humans is to compare
items (e.g., whether one word is more positive than the
other). Most commonly, the items are compared in pairs
(Thurstone, 1927; David, 1963). In this work, we use
Best–Worst Scaling (described in Section 3.2.), which is
another annotation technique that exploits the comparative
approach to annotation. Best–Worst Scaling forces the re-
spondent to indicate a choice (Best and Worst), while still
producing real-valued scores reﬂective of relative impor-
tance. In a small marketing study that compared three
scaling techniques (9-point rating scale, paired compar-
isons, and Best–Worst Scaling), Cohen (2003) observed
that Best–Worst Scaling produces more reliable, unbiased,
and more discriminating results than the other rating anno-
tation methods do. Kiritchenko and Mohammad (2016a)
applied Best–Worst Scaling to annotate terms (words and
phrases) for sentiment intensity and showed that it produces
remarkably consistent annotations.
3. Creating a Sentiment Lexicon for
Opposing Polarity Phrases
In order to create a real-valued sentiment composition lex-
icon for opposing polarity phrases, we ﬁrst selected a
diverse set of opposing polarity ngrams and their con-
stituents (Section 3.1.), and then annotated them for senti-
ment through Best–Worst Scaling and crowdsourcing (Sec-
tion 3.2.). Re-doing the annotation with different sets of
annotators produced consistent rankings of terms by sen-
timent, proving that the obtained annotations are reliable
(Section 3.3.).
3.1. Term Selection
Opposing polarity phrases frequently occur in many do-
mains. For this work, we chose English tweets as our
source of phrases. We polled the Twitter API (from 2013
to 2015) to collect about 11 million tweets that contain
emoticons: ‘:)’ or ‘:(’. We will refer to this corpus as the
Emoticon Tweets Corpus . From this corpus, we selected
bigrams and trigrams that had at least one positive word
and at least one negative word. The polarity labels (posi-
tive or negative) of the words were determined by simple
look-up in existing sentiment lexicons: Hu and Liu lexicon
(Hu and Liu, 2004), NRC Emotion lexicon (Mohammad
and Turney, 2013), MPQA lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005),
and NRC’s automatically generated Twitter-speciﬁc lexi-
con (Kiritchenko et al., 2014). 3 Apart from the require-
ment of having at least one positive and at least one nega-
tive word, an ngram must satisfy the following criteria:
3If a word was marked with conﬂicting polarity in two lexi-
cons, then that word was not considered as positive or negative.
1158

--- PAGE 3 ---
• the ngram must have a clear meaning on its own, (for
example, the ngram should not start or end with a con-
junction like ‘or’ or ‘and’);
• the ngram should not include a named entity;
• the ngram should not include obscene language.
In addition, we ensured that there was a good variety of
phrases—for example, even though there were a large num-
ber of ngrams of the formsuper w, where w is a negative ad-
jective, only a small number of such ngrams were included.
Finally, we aimed to achieve a good spread in terms of de-
gree of sentiment association (from very negative terms to
very positive terms, and all the degrees of polarity in be-
tween). For this, we estimated the sentiment score of each
phrase using an automatic PMI-based method described in
(Kiritchenko et al., 2014). 4 Then, the full range of senti-
ment values was divided into 5 bins, and about a hundred
bigrams and a hundred trigrams were selected from each
bin, except for the middle bin from which only 50 bigrams
and 50 trigrams were selected.5
In total, 851 ngrams (bigrams and trigrams) were selected.
We also chose for annotation all unigrams that appeared in
the selected set of bigrams and trigrams. 6 There were 810
such unigrams. The master list consisted of 1,661 terms.
Note that since the multi-word phrases and single-word
terms were drawn from a corpus of tweets, they include
a small number of hashtag words (e.g., #wantit) and cre-
atively spelled words (e.g., plssss). However, a majority of
the terms are those that one would use in everyday English.
3.2. Term Annotation with Best–Worst Scaling
Best–Worst Scaling (BWS), also sometimes referred to as
Maximum Difference Scaling (MaxDiff), is an annotation
scheme that exploits the comparative approach to annota-
tion (Louviere and Woodworth, 1990; Cohen, 2003; Lou-
viere et al., 2015). Annotators are given four items (4-tuple)
and asked which item is the Best (highest in terms of the
property of interest) and which is the Worst (least in terms
of the property of interest). These annotations can then be
easily converted into real-valued scores of association be-
tween the items and the property, which eventually allows
for creating a ranked list of items as per their association
with the property of interest.
As the ﬁrst step, the master list of 1,661 terms was ran-
domly sampled (with replacement) to create 3,322 (2 x
1,661) sets of four terms each, 4-tuples, that satisfy the fol-
lowing criteria:
1. no two 4-tuples have the same four terms;
2. no two terms within a 4-tuple are identical;
4Our goal is to create a sentiment lexicon with reliable an-
notations of terms; therefore, the core sentiment annotations are
done manually (as described in Section 3.2.). The automatically
estimated sentiment scores obtained with the PMI-based method,
which are less reliable than manual annotations, help only to se-
lect terms with different degrees of sentiment association.
5We wanted to include fewer neutral terms.
6Stopword unigrams, namely numbers, auxiliary verbs, pro-
nouns, prepositions, exclamations, articles, and conjunctions,
were not selected for annotation.
3. each term in the term list appears approximately in the
same number of 4-tuples;
4. each pair of terms appears approximately in the same
number of 4-tuples.
Next, the set of 4-tuples was annotated through a crowd-
sourcing platform, CrowdFlower. The annotators were
presented with four terms (single words and multi-word
phrases) at a time, and asked which term is the most posi-
tive (or least negative) and which is the most negative (or
least positive). Below is an example annotation question. 7
Focus terms:
1. shameless self promotion 2. happy tears 3. hug
4. major pain
Q1: Identify the term that is associated with the most amount of
positive sentiment (or least amount of negative sentiment) – the
most positive term:
1. shameless self promotion
2. happy tears
3. hug
4. major pain
Q2: Identify the term that is associated with the most amount of
negative sentiment (or, least amount of positive sentiment) – the
most negative term:
1. shameless self promotion
2. happy tears
3. hug
4. major pain
Each 4-tuple was annotated by eight respondents. Only na-
tive speakers of English residing in the United States were
asked to annotate the terms. To ensure data quality, we fol-
lowed best practices of crowdsourcing, such as providing
clear and easy to follow instructions, using check questions
for which the correct answer was already determined by in-
ternal annotations, and discarding annotations provided by
annotators who obtained low accuracy (less than 70%) on
the check questions.
The responses were then translated into real-valued scores
for all the terms through a simple counting procedure: For
each term, its score is calculated as the percentage of times
the term was chosen as the most positive minus the per-
centage of times the term was chosen as the most negative
(Orme, 2009; Flynn and Marley, 2014). These real-valued
scores also produce a ranking of terms by sentiment.
When selecting the terms, we used sentiment associations
obtained from both manual and automatic lexicons. As
a result, some unigrams had erroneous sentiment associa-
tions. After manually annotating the full set of 1,661 terms
(that include unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams), we found
that 114 bigrams and 161 trigrams have all their compris-
ing unigrams of the same polarity. These 275 ngrams were
discarded from the further analysis. We will refer to the
remaining set of 1,178 opposing polarity bigrams, trigrams
and their constituent unigrams with the corresponding man-
ually obtained sentiment association scores as the Senti-
ment Composition Lexicon for Opposing Polarity Phrases
(SCL-OPP). For analysis in the rest of the paper, we con-
sider an ngram positive if its manually annotated sentiment
7The full set of instructions to annotators is available at
http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/BestWorst.html
1159

--- PAGE 4 ---
Ngrams Number of terms
positive negative total
unigrams 292 310 602
bigrams 135 176 311
trigrams 104 161 265
all 531 647 1,178
Table 1: The number of unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams in
SCL-OPP.
Term Sentiment
score
Unigrams
friends 0.703
great 0.625
long -0.094
breaking -0.500
loss -0.672
Bigrams
bloody great 0.609
long holiday 0.484
great capture 0.250
breaking free 0.172
great loss -0.734
Trigrams
best winter break 0.844
long time friends 0.734
nice long walk 0.469
isn’t long enough -0.188
heart breaking moment -0.797
Table 2: Example entries with real-valued sentiment scores
from SCL-OPP.
score is greater than or equal to zero, and negative if its
sentiment score is less than zero. Table 1 shows the total
number of unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams in SCL-OPP. In
addition, the table displays the distribution of positive and
negative ngrams in the set. Table 2 shows a few example
entries from the lexicon.
3.3. Quality of Annotations
Let majority answer refer to the option chosen most often
for a question. 81% of the responses to the Best–Worst
questions matched the majority answer.
We also tested the consistency of the aggregated scores by
randomly dividing the sets of eight responses to each ques-
tion into two halves and comparing the rankings obtained
from these two groups of responses. The Spearman rank
correlation coefﬁcient between the two sets of rankings was
found to be 0.98. (The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient be-
tween the two sets of sentiment scores was also 0.98.) Thus,
even though annotators might disagree about answers to in-
dividual questions, the aggregated scores produced by ap-
plying the counting procedure on the Best–Worst annota-
tions are remarkably reliable at ranking terms by sentiment.
4. Sentiment Composition Patterns
SCL-OPP allows us to explore sentiment composition pat-
terns in opposing polarity phrases. We deﬁne a Sentiment
Composition Pattern (SCP) as a rule that includes on the
left-hand side the parts of speech and the sentiment associ-
ations of the constituent unigrams (in the order they appear
in the phrase), and on the right-hand side the sentiment as-
sociation of the phrase. The part-of-speech (POS) sequence
of a phrase is determined by looking up the most com-
mon part-of-speech sequence for that phrase in the Emoti-
con Tweets Corpus.8 Table 3 shows all POS sequences for
which our lexicon contains more than ten phrases. For each
POS sequence, the table lists all SCPs that have at least two
examples in the lexicon.9 The parts of speech are encoded
as follows: ‘A’ stands for adjective, ‘N’ for noun, ‘V’ for
verb, ‘R’ for adverb, ‘P’ for preposition or subordinating
conjunction, ‘D’ for determiner, and ‘&’ for coordinating
conjunction. The polarity of the terms is shown with the
following symbols: a green ‘ △’ denotes a positive word
or phrase, and an orange ‘ ▽’ denotes a negative word or
phrase. The table also shows an example phrase for each
SCP.
The most frequent POS sequence in the lexicon is ‘A+N’:
there are 141 phrases that have an adjective as the ﬁrst word
and a noun as the second. The entries under ‘A+N’ in Ta-
ble 3 show that there are four different SCPs formed by this
POS sequence differing in the polarity of the phrase and the
polarity of the constituent words. For example, there are 34
positive and 39 negative phrases where the ﬁrst word is a
positive adjective and the second word is a negative noun.
In other words, a positive adjective and a negative noun can
form either a positive phrase (e.g.,happy accident) or a neg-
ative phrase (e.g., great loss). In general, there are many
POS sequences (e.g., ‘A+N’, ‘N+N’, ‘V+D+N’, etc.) for
which SCPs with the same left-hand side can form either a
positive or a negative phrase, and our lexicon contains rep-
resentatives of both cases.
Some parts of speech impact the sentiment of the phrase
in a predictable manner. For example, adverbs often play
a role of an intensiﬁer—a word that increases or decreases
the sentiment intensity of the following word (e.g., incred-
ibly slow, dearly missed ). Only the intensity of the next
word is changed while its polarity (positive or negative) is
often preserved. Some adjectives can also play the role of
an intensiﬁer when combined with another adjective (e.g.,
crazy talented) or a noun (e.g., epic fail). For example, the
adjective great, often considered highly positive, becomes
an intensiﬁer when combined with a noun (e.g., great loss,
great capture). Yet, other adjectives determine the polarity
of the entire phrase (e.g., happy accident, bad luck). Over-
all, even though adjectives and verbs are frequently the pri-
mary source of sentiment in the phrase, some nouns can
override their sentiment as in new crisis or leave a #smile.
Since SCL-OPP has phrases corresponding to many differ-
ent kinds of Sentiment Composition Patterns, it is a useful
resource for linguistic studies of sentiment composition as
well as for testing automatic techniques that estimate senti-
ment intensity of opposing polarity phrases.
8The corpus was automatically POS tagged using the CMU
Tweet NLP tool (Gimpel et al., 2011). A small percentage of
phrases were POS tagged incorrectly.
9The complete list of all SCPs is available at
http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#OPP.
1160

--- PAGE 5 ---
POS sequence # of Example
SCP phrases
A+N 141
▽A + △N → ▽phrase 40 bad luck
▽A + △N → △phrase 28 late nap
△A + ▽N → ▽phrase 39 great loss
△A + ▽N → △phrase 34 happy accident
N+N 35
▽N + △N → ▽phrase 4 split personality
▽N + △N → △phrase 6 sneak peek
△N + ▽N → ▽phrase 13 heart attack
△N + ▽N → △phrase 12 coffee break
R+A 27
▽R + △A → △phrase 9 ridiculously happy
△R + ▽A → ▽phrase 16 incredibly slow
△R + ▽A → △phrase 2 fashionably late
V+D+N 26
▽V + D + △N → ▽phrase 11 lost a child
▽V + D + △N → △phrase 6 leave a #smile
△V + D + ▽N → ▽phrase 3 found the debris
△V + D + ▽N → △phrase 6 solved the problem
A+A 20
▽A + △A → ▽phrase 4 stinking hot
▽A + △A → △phrase 13 crazy talented
△A + ▽A → ▽phrase 2 plain sad
V+N 20
▽V + △N → ▽phrase 14 losing hope
▽V + △N → △phrase 3 break dance
△V + ▽N → ▽phrase 2 committed suicide
R+V 14
▽R + △V → ▽phrase 2 barely afford
△R + ▽V → ▽phrase 10 truly missed
N+V 13
▽N + △V → ▽phrase 2 hospital visit
▽N + △V → △phrase 3 problem solved
△N + ▽V → ▽phrase 7 love hurts
V+P+V 11
▽V + P + △V → ▽phrase 3 sucks to live
△V + P + ▽V → ▽phrase 5 like to torture
D+A+N 11
D + ▽A + △N → ▽phrase 4 a bad deal
D + ▽A + △N → △phrase 2 a long nap
D + △A + ▽N → △phrase 4 a good problem
A+N+N 11
▽A + △N + △N → ▽phrase 3 shameless self
promotion
▽A + △N + △N → △phrase 3 long time friends
△A + △N + ▽N → △phrase 2 new hair cut
Table 3: Sentiment composition patterns (SCPs) in SCL-
OPP. ‘A’ stands for adjective, ‘N’ stands for noun, ‘V’
stands for verb, ‘R’ stands for adverb, ‘P’ stands for prepo-
sition or subordinating conjunction, ‘D’ stands for deter-
miner, and ‘&’ stands for coordinating conjunction. The
polarity of the terms is shown with the following symbols:
a green ‘△’ denotes a positive word or phrase, and an or-
ange ‘▽’ denotes a negative word or phrase.
5. An Interactive Visualization of SCL-OPP
For ease of exploration of the Sentiment Composition Lex-
icon for Opposing Polarity Phrases, we created an online
interactive visualization.10 Figure 1 shows a screenshot of
default view. It has two components. The main (top) com-
ponent shows a scatter plot of sentiment scores for opposing
polarity phrases. Each point in the scatter plot corresponds
to an ngram (a bigram or a trigram). The x-axis is the sen-
timent score of the ﬁrst content word in the ngram; the y-
axis is the sentiment score of the second content word in
the ngram. All bigrams and trigrams that have two content
words (and possibly a stop word) are shown. The polarity
of the phrase is represented by the color and direction of
the triangle: a green ‘△’ corresponds to a positive phrase,
and an orange ‘▽’ corresponds to a negative phrase. The
size of a triangle is proportional to the absolute value of
the phrase’s sentiment score. The exact sentiment score
of the phrase, as well as the sentiment scores of its con-
stituent words, can be viewed by hovering over the point
in the graph with the mouse. Notice that all points lie in
the top left and bottom right quadrants of the plot since in
each phrase one of the words is positive and the other one
is negative.
The second (bottom) visualization component, known as a
treemap, shows tiles corresponding to each part-of-speech
(POS) sequence present in the dataset. The size (area) of a
tile is proportional to the number of instances correspond-
ing to that POS sequence. One can see that the most fre-
quent sequence in the dataset is the bigram where the ﬁrst
word is an adjective and the second word is a noun (A+N).
Interactivity: The two components are linked so as to al-
low ﬁltering of the information in one component by mak-
ing a selection in the other component. The main visual-
ization component can be ﬁltered by clicking on the POS
sequence of interest in the treemap. For example, clicking
on the ‘A+N’ updates the scatter plot to show only phrases
with an adjective as the ﬁrst word and a noun as the second
(see Figure 2). By clicking on a point in the main com-
ponent, the treemap is updated to show only the tile corre-
sponding to the POS sequence of the selected phrase. The
ﬁltering in both components can also be done by checking
the boxes corresponding to the POS sequences or polarity
of phrases on the right. The selection can further be nar-
rowed down by adjusting the ranges of sentiment scores for
the phrase and the constituents using the sliders on the right.
Thus, the viewers can easily explore the subsets of the data
they are interested in.
6. Applications of SCL-OPP
The Sentiment Composition Lexicon for Opposing Polarity
Phrases can be used in various ways. Here we describe a
few of its current and possible future applications.
6.1. Linguistic Analysis of Sentiment
Composition in Opposing Polarity Phrases
Kiritchenko and Mohammad (2016c) further analyze reg-
ularities present in different kinds of phrases in SCL-OPP
10http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#OPP
1161

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure 1: A screenshot of the default view in the interactive visualization for SCL-OPP. The top component shows a scatter plot of
sentiment scores for opposing polarity phrases. Each point in the scatter plot corresponds to an ngram (a bigram or a trigram). The x-axis
is the sentiment score of the ﬁrst content word in the ngram; the y-axis is the sentiment score of the second content word in the ngram.
The polarity of the phrase is represented by the color and direction of the triangle. The size of a triangle is proportional to the absolute
value of the phrase’s sentiment score. The bottom component (treemap) shows tiles corresponding to each POS sequence present in the
dataset. The size of a tile is proportional to the number of instances corresponding to that POS sequence.
to get insights into how sentiment is composed. They con-
clude that for most phrases the sentiment of the phrase can-
not be reliably predicted only from the parts of speech and
polarities of their constituent words. They also propose
several unsupervised and supervised techniques for deter-
mining sentiment of opposing polarity phrases (sentiment
composition). Furthermore, they show that the constituent
words, their parts of speech, sentiment scores, and embed-
dings are all useful features in supervised sentiment predic-
tion on this dataset.
6.2. Evaluating Automatic Methods that Predict
Sentiment Intensity of Phrases
Portions of SCL-OPP were used as development and test
sets in SemEval-2016 shared task (Task 7) ‘Determining
Sentiment Intensity of English and Arabic Phrases’ (Kir-
itchenko et al., 2016). 11 The objective of this task was to
11http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2016/task7/
automatically predict sentiment intensity scores for multi-
word phrases. The task consisted of three subtasks, one for
each of the three domains: general English, English Twitter,
and Arabic Twitter. The development and test datasets for
the English Twitter domain, English Twitter Mixed Polar-
ity Sets, were constructed from the master list described in
Section 3.1. They include a large number of opposing po-
larity phrases, some same polarity phrases, and their single-
word constituents. Some terms that appeared in a previous
iteration of the shared task were removed. Two hundred
terms with the corresponding manual sentiment annotations
were released to participants as a development set. A total
of 1,069 terms were used as the test set. Five teams submit-
ted nine system outputs for the task. The best result on the
English Twitter Mixed Polarity test set was achieved with a
supervised method by exploiting a variety of available sen-
timent resources; the highest Kendall’s rank correlation be-
tween the predicted and gold term rankings was 0.523.
1162

--- PAGE 7 ---
Figure 2: A screenshot of the interactive visualization when one of POS sequences (A+N) is selected. One can also see the tool tip box
showing information about the phrase (lucky devil) over which the mouse is hovering (the mouse pointer is not shown).
6.3. Generating a Large Sentiment Lexicon of
Opposing Polarity Phrases
A possible future application of SCL-OPP is the automatic
creation of a high-coverage sentiment lexicon of opposing
polarity phrases. One can use the manually created lexicon
entries as training data and learn a regression model over a
set of features that captures the co-occurrence information
(e.g., word and phrase embeddings). Such a high-coverage
lexicon will be useful in downstream applications such as
sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation and stance detection
(Mohammad et al., 2016b).
6.4. Determining How Sentiment is Composed in
the Human Brain
One of our long-term goals is to study how humans process
sentiment in words and phrases. It is known that the ac-
tivity in the human brain differs when the person is shown
a positive or a negative word. We can gather brain activ-
ity of participants when they are presented with opposing
polarity phrases, as well as when they are presented with
the constituent words alone. One of the hypotheses that can
be tested is whether an opposing polarity phrase triggers a
valenced response pertaining to each of its constituents or
a valenced response pertaining only to the meaning of the
whole phrase (or both).
7. Summary
We have created a real-valued sentiment lexicon of oppos-
ing polarity phrases (such ashappy accident) and their con-
stituent words (such as happy and accident) through man-
ual annotation. We used an annotation technique known
as Best–Worst Scaling, which has been shown to provide
unbiased, reliable, and highly discriminating results. The
resulting lexicon, the Sentiment Composition Lexicon for
Opposing Polarity Phrases (SCL-OPP), includes a variety
of phrases pertaining to many different part-of-speech se-
quences. Lexicons such as SCL-OPP, which include entries
for phrases as well as their constituents, are useful in under-
standing how meaning (especially sentiment) is composed.
Since opposing polarity phrases are particularly challeng-
ing for automatic sentiment analysis systems, we used en-
tries from SCL-OPP in an ofﬁcial test set of SemEval-2016
Task 7 (a shared task on automatically determining senti-
ment intensity of phrases). Additionally, we envision the
following ways in which the lexicon can be used: (1) to
automatically create a large coverage sentiment lexicon of
multi-word phrases and apply it in downstream applications
such as sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation, and (2) to
investigate how the human brain processes sentiment com-
position. The lexicon is made freely available to the re-
search community.
1163

--- PAGE 8 ---
8. Bibliographic References
Bradley, M. M. and Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affec-
tive ratings. Technical report, The Center for Research
in Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
Cohen, S. H. (2003). Maximum difference scaling: Im-
proved measures of importance and preference for seg-
mentation. Sawtooth Software, Inc.
David, H. A. (1963). The method of paired comparisons .
Hafner Publishing Company, New York.
Dodds, P. S., Harris, K. D., Kloumann, I. M., Bliss, C. A.,
and Danforth, C. M. (2011). Temporal patterns of hap-
piness and information in a global social network: Hedo-
nometrics and Twitter. PloS One, 6(12):e26752.
Dodds, P. S., Clark, E. M., Desu, S., Frank, M. R., Rea-
gan, A. J., Williams, J. R., Mitchell, L., Harris, K. D.,
Kloumann, I. M., Bagrow, J. P., et al. (2015). Human
language reveals a universal positivity bias. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(8):2389–2394.
Esuli, A. and Sebastiani, F. (2006). SENTIWORDNET:
A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 417–422.
Flynn, T. N. and Marley, A. A. J. (2014). Best-worst scal-
ing: theory and methods. In Stephane Hess et al., editors,
Handbook of Choice Modelling, pages 178–201. Edward
Elgar Publishing.
Gimpel, K., Schneider, N., O’Connor, B., Das, D., Mills,
D., Eisenstein, J., Heilman, M., Yogatama, D., Flanigan,
J., and Smith, N. A. (2011). Part-of-speech tagging for
Twitter: Annotation, features, and experiments. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL).
Graham, Y ., Mathur, N., and Baldwin, T. (2015). Accurate
evaluation of segment-level machine translation metrics.
In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the ACL (NAACL) , pages 1183–
1191.
Hartner, M. (2013). The lingering after-effects in the
reader’s mind – an investigation into the affective dimen-
sion of literary reading. Journal of Literary Theory On-
line.
Hu, M. and Liu, B. (2004). Mining and summarizing
customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (KDD) , pages 168–177, New
York, NY , USA.
Kiritchenko, S. and Mohammad, S. M. (2016a). Capturing
reliable ﬁne-grained sentiment associations by crowd-
sourcing. In Proceedings of The 15th Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAACL), San Diego, California.
Kiritchenko, S. and Mohammad, S. M. (2016b). The ef-
fect of negators, modals, and degree adverbs on senti-
ment composition. Submitted.
Kiritchenko, S. and Mohammad, S. M. (2016c). Sentiment
composition of words with opposing polarities. In Pro-
ceedings of The 15th Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL) ,
San Diego, California.
Kiritchenko, S., Zhu, X., and Mohammad, S. M. (2014).
Sentiment analysis of short informal texts. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 50:723–762.
Kiritchenko, S., Mohammad, S. M., and Salameh, M.
(2016). SemEval-2016 Task 7: Determining sentiment
intensity of English and Arabic phrases. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval), San Diego, California, June.
Kleres, J. (2011). Emotions and narrative analysis: A
methodological approach. Journal for the Theory of So-
cial Behaviour, 41(2):182–202.
Louviere, J. J. and Woodworth, G. G. (1990). Best-worst
analysis. Working Paper. Department of Marketing and
Economic Analysis, University of Alberta.
Louviere, J. J., Flynn, T. N., and Marley, A. A. J. (2015).
Best-Worst Scaling: Theory, Methods and Applications .
Cambridge University Press.
Mohammad, S. M. and Turney, P. D. (2013). Crowdsourc-
ing a word–emotion association lexicon. Computational
Intelligence, 29(3):436–465.
Mohammad, S. M., Kiritchenko, S., and Zhu, X. (2013).
NRC-Canada: Building the state-of-the-art in sentiment
analysis of tweets. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Atlanta, Georgia.
Mohammad, S. M., Kiritchenko, S., Sobhani, P., Zhu, X.,
and Cherry, C. (2016a). A dataset for detecting stance in
tweets. In Proceedings of 10th edition of the the Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC) ,
Portoroˇz, Slovenia.
Mohammad, S. M., Sobhani, P., and Kiritchenko, S.
(2016b). Stance and sentiment in tweets. Special Sec-
tion of the ACM Transactions on Internet Technology on
Argumentation in Social Media, Submitted.
Orme, B. (2009). Maxdiff analysis: Simple counting,
individual-level logit, and HB. Sawtooth Software, Inc.
Stone, P., Dunphy, D. C., Smith, M. S., Ogilvie, D. M., and
associates. (1966). The General Inquirer: A Computer
Approach to Content Analysis. The MIT Press.
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Toﬁloski, M., V oll, K., and Stede,
M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods for sentiment analy-
sis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2):267–307.
Thurstone, L. L. (1927). A law of comparative judgment.
Psychological review, 34(4):273.
Turney, P. and Littman, M. L. (2003). Measuring praise
and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation from as-
sociation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems ,
21(4).
Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V ., and Brysbaert, M.
(2013). Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for
13,915 English lemmas. Behavior Research Methods ,
45(4):1191–1207.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., and Hoffmann, P. (2005). Recogniz-
ing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on HLT and
EMNLP, pages 347–354, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
1164