--- PAGE 1 ---
Submitted to the Special issue on Semantic Analysis in Socia l Media, Computational Intelligence.
Guest editors: Atefeh F arzindar (farzindarATnlptechnolo giesDOTca), Diana Inkpen (dianaAT eecsDOT uottawaDOTca)
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts
Saif M. Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko
National Research Council Canada.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6
{saif.mohammad,svetlana.kiritchenko}@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Detecting emotions in microblogs and social media posts has applications for industry, health,
and security. Statistical, supervised automatic methods f or emotion detection rely on text that is
labeled for emotions, but such data is rare and available for only a handful of basic emotions. In
this paper, we show that emotion-word hashtags are good manu al labels of emotions in tweets. W e
also propose a method to generate a large lexicon of word–emo tion associations from this emotion-
labeled tweet corpus. This is the ﬁrst lexicon with real-val ued word–emotion association scores. W e
begin with experiments for six basic emotions and show that t he hashtag annotations are consistent
and match with the annotations of trained judges. W e also sho w how the extracted tweets corpus
and word–emotion associations can be used to improve emotio n classiﬁcation accuracy in a diﬀerent
non-tweets domain.
Eminent psychologist, Robert Plutchik, had proposed that e motions have a relationship with
personality traits. However, empirical experiments to est ablish this relationship have been stymied
by the lack of comprehensive emotion resources. Since perso nality may be associated with any of the
hundreds of emotions, and since our hashtag approach scales easily to a large number of emotions,
we extend our corpus by collecting tweets with hashtags pert aining to 585 ﬁne emotions. Then,
for the ﬁrst time, we present experiments to show that ﬁne emo tion categories such as that of
excitement, guilt, yearning, and admiration are useful in a utomatically detecting personality from
text. Stream-of-consciousness essays and collections of F acebook posts marked with personality
traits of the author are used as the test sets.
Key words: Emotions, aﬀect, tweets, social media, hashtags, basic emo tions, personality
detection, Big 5 model, word–emotion associations, sentim ent analysis.
1. INTRODUCTION
We use language not just to convey facts, but also our emotion s. For example, given the sentence,
That jerk stole my photo on tumblr , it is easy to deduce that the speaker is angry. Clues to emoti on
are often present at a lexical level. For example, delightful and yummy indicate the emotion of joy,
gloomy and cry indicate sadness, shout and jerk indicate anger, and so on. Automatically identifying
emotions expressed in text has a number of applications, inc luding customer relation management
(Bougie et al. , 2003), determining popularity of products and government s (Mohammad and Yang,
2011), identifying high-risk suicide cases (Osgood and Wal ker, 1959; Matykiewicz et al., 2009; Pestian
et al. , 2008; Cherry et al. , 2012), improving human-computer interaction (Vel´ asquez, 1997; Ravaja
et al. , 2006), and automatic tutoring systems (Litman and Forbes- Riley, 2004).
Most statistical automatic approaches are supervised and r equire large amounts of labeled data.
Manual annotation of text with emotions is time-intensive a nd costly. Thus only a small amount
of such text exists. Examples include 1,250 newspaper headl ines (Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2007)
and about 4000 blog sentences (Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007) th at are classiﬁed as expressing one
of six basic emotions (joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, a nd surprise) or neutral. However, humans
are capable of distinguishing and expressing a few hundred d iﬀerent emotions such as guilt, remorse,
optimism, and enthusiasm (not just six). As we will show thro ugh experiments, identifying these
ﬁne-grained emotions are useful in applications such as per sonality detection.
None of the existing datasets contain emotion-annotated te xt from social media websites such
as Facebook and Twitter. Twitter is an online social network ing and microblogging service where
users post and read messages that are up to 140 characters lon g. Unlike Facebook posts, which are
largely private and often visible only to friends of the post er, Twitter posts are public and visible
to all. The Twitter posts are called tweets. The people who post these messages are called tweeters.
Often a tweet may include one or more words immediately prece ded with a hash symbol (#). These
✐C National Research Council Canada, 2013

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Computational Intelligence
words are called hashtags. Hashtags serve many purposes, but most notably they are use d to indicate
the topic. Often these words add to the information in the twe et: for example, hashtags indicating
the tone of the message or the tweeter’s emotions.
From the perspective of one consuming tweets, hashtags play a role in search: Twitter allows
people to search tweets not only through words in the tweets, but also through hashtagged words.
Consider the tweet below:
We are ﬁghting for the 99% that have been left behind. #OWS #an ger
A number of people tweeting about the Occupy Wall Street move ment added the hashtag #OWS
to their tweets. This allowed people searching for tweets ab out the movement to access them simply
by searching for the #OWS hashtag. In this particular instance, the tweeter has also a dded an
emotion-word hashtag #anger, possibly to convey that he or she is angry.
In this paper, we show that emotion word hashtags in tweets, s uch as #angry above, can be
used as labeled data by a supervised learning system for emot ion detection. Note that these emotion
labels are not assigned by somebody other than the author (as is the case in traditional annotation),
but rather these are emotion labels given by the tweeters the mselves to their own messages, and
corresponding to their own emotions at the time the message w as composed.
We ﬁrst create a large corpus of such emotion-labeled tweets for six basic emotions (Section 3).
We will refer to this dataset as the Hashtag Emotion Corpus. W e show how the Hashtag Emotion
Corpus can be used for automatic emotion detection in tweets and also to improve automatic emotion
detection in a diﬀerent domain (newspaper headlines) (Sect ion 4). We show through experiments that
even though the tweets and hashtags cover a diverse array of t opics and were generated by thousands
of diﬀerent individuals (possibly with very diﬀerent educa tional and socio-economic backgrounds),
the hashtag-based annotations of emotion are consistent an d match the intuitions of trained judges.
A word–emotion association lexicon is a list of words and ass ociated emotions. They can be used
in numerous applications of emotion detection, such as pers onality detection, automatic dialogue
systems, automatic tutoring systems, customer relation mo dels, and even simply for highlighting
words and phrases in a piece of text to quickly convey regions of aﬀect. In Section 5, we describe
how we extract a word–emotion association lexicon from the H ashtag Emotion Corpus. We will refer
to it as the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon . In addition to word–emotion pairs, each entry in this lexic on
also comes with a real-valued score indicating the degree of association between the word and the
emotion. Higher scores indicate greater association. We ﬁr st show how the word–emotion lexicon
helps in emotion detection, and then use it to improve person ality detection from text as described
below.
Plutchik (1962) proposed that emotions have a relationship with personality. However, empirical
experiments to establish the relationship have been stymie d by the lack of comprehensive emotion
resources—Humans are capable of feeling and expressing hun dreds of diﬀerent emotions. Since our
hashtag approach can easily be scaled up to work with more emo tions, we extend our corpus by
collecting tweets with hashtags pertaining to 585 ﬁne emoti ons (Section 6). We also expand the
Hashtag Emotion Lexicon to include entries for each of the 58 5 emotions. This is the ﬁrst lexicon
with real-valued word–emotion association scores for hund reds of emotions. 1
Then, for the ﬁrst time, we present experiments to show that ﬁ ne emotion categories such as that
of excitement, guilt, yearning, and admiration are useful i n automatically detecting personality from
text (Section 7). Personality detection from text is the tas k of automatically detecting a person’s
personality traits, such as extroversion and agreeability , from free-form text written by her. As a
testbed for our experiments we use standard personality-la beled texts used in prior work:
• Stream-of-consciousness essays: a collection of 2,469 essays (1.9 million words) and associ ated Big
5 personality traits compiled by Pennebaker and King (1999) .
• Collections of Facebook posts : a collection of 10,000 Facebook posts (status updates) of 2 50 users
and associated Big 5 personality traits compiled by Kosinsk i et al. (2013).
1Email Saif Mohammad to obtain a copy of the Hashtag Emotion Co rpus or the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon:
saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 3
Figure 1. An overview of the resources created and the main classiﬁcat ion experiments presented
in this paper. Some of the experiments described in this pape r are not shown here to avoid clutter.
Additionally, we perform experiments to show that the gains provided by the ﬁne aﬀect categories are
not obtained by using coarse aﬀect categories alone. Thus sh owing the beneﬁt of modeling hundreds
of aﬀect categories, as opposed to modeling only a handful of basic emotions, in an extrinsic task.
Figure 1 gives an overview of the resources created and the ma in classiﬁcation experiments presented
in this paper.
The paper is organized as follows: We begin with a descriptio n of related work (Section 2). Next
we show how we create emotion-labeled text from tweets (Sect ion 3). Section 4 presents experiments
that demonstrate that the emotion labels are consistent and useful for automatic emotion detection.
In Section 5, we show how we create a word–emotion lexicon fro m the tweets. In Section 6, we
describe how we extend the labeled tweets corpus and also the word–emotion lexicon from a handful
of emotions to a few hundred emotions. In Section 7, we presen t experiments to demonstrate that
the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon is useful in the extrinsic task o f detecting personality of authors from
their essays and from collections of their Facebook posts. W e conclude and present future research
directions in Section 8.
2. RELATED WORK
We present below related work on emotion detection, past wor k on creating emotion labeled
text, and some previous approaches to personality detectio n.
2.1. Emotion Detection
Emotion analysis can be applied to all kinds of text, but cert ain domains and modes of commu-
nication tend to have more overt expressions of emotions tha n others. Genereux and Evans (2006),
Mihalcea and Liu (2006), and Neviarouskaya et al. (2009) analyzed web-logs. Alm et al. (2005)
and Francisco and Gerv´ as (2006) worked on fairy tales. Bouc ouvalas (2002), John et al. (2006),
and Mohammad (2012a) explored emotions in novels. Zhe and Bo ucouvalas (2002), Holzman and
Holzman and Pottenger (2003), and Ma et al. (2005) annotated chat messages for emotions. Liu

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Computational Intelligence
Table 1. Inter-annotator agreement (Pearson’s correlation) among st 6 annotators on the 1000-
headlines dataset.
# of % of
emotion instances instances r
anger 132 13.2 0.50
disgust 43 4.3 0.45
fear 247 24.7 0.64
joy 344 34.4 0.60
sadness 283 28.3 0.68
surprise 253 25.3 0.36
simple average 0.54
frequency-based average 0.43
et al. (2003) and Mohammad and Yang (2011) worked on email data. Kim et al. (2009) analyzed
sadness in posts reacting to news of Michael Jackson’s death . Tumasjan et al. (2010) study Twitter
as a forum for political deliberation.
Much of this work focuses on six emotions argued by Ekman (199 2) to be the most basic
emotions: joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise . Plutchik (1962, 1980, 1994) proposes a
theory with eight basic emotions. These include Ekman’s six as well as trust and anticipation.
There is less work on other emotions, for example, work by Pea rl and Steyvers (2010) that focuses
on politeness, rudeness, embarrassment, formality, persu asion, deception, conﬁdence, and disbelief.
Bollen et al. (2011) measured tension, depression, anger, vigor, fatigu e, and confusion in tweets.
Francisco and Gerv´ as (2006) marked sentences in fairy tale s with tags for pleasantness, activation,
and dominance, using lexicons of words associated with the t hree categories. One of the advantages
of our work is that we can easily collect tweets with hashtags for hundreds of emotions, well beyond
the basic six. This labeled data is a valuable resource in bui lding automatic systems for detecting
these emotions in text.
Go et al. (2009) and Gonz´ alez-Ib´ a˜ nezet al. (2011) noted that sometimes people use the hashtag
#sarcasm to indicate that their tweet is sarcastic. They collected tw eets with hashtags of #sarcasm
and #sarcastic to create a dataset of sarcastic tweets. We follow their idea s and collect tweets with
hashtags pertaining to diﬀerent emotions. Additionally, w e present several experiments to validate
that the emotion labels in the corpus are consistent and matc h intuitions of trained judges.
2.2. Existing Emotion-Labeled Text
A number of text resources exist that are labeled for positiv e and negative sentiments, including
movie and product reviews, newspaper headlines, blog posts , and tweets. However, text labeled
with ﬁne emotion labels is scarce. The SemEval-2007 Aﬀectiv e Text corpus has newspaper headlines
labeled with the six Ekman emotions by six annotators (Strap parava and Mihalcea, 2007). More
precisely, for each headline–emotion pair, the annotators gave scores from 0 to 100 indicating
how strongly the headline expressed the emotion. The inter- annotator agreement as determined by
calculating the Pearson’s product moment correlation ( r) between the scores given by each annotator
and the average of the other ﬁve annotators is shown in Table 1 . For our experiments, we considered
scores greater than 25 to indicate that the headline express es the corresponding emotion.
The dataset was created for an unsupervised competition, an d consisted of 250 headlines of
trial data and 1000 headlines of test data. We will refer to th em as the 250-headlines and the
1000-headlines datasets respectively. However, the data h as also been used in a supervised setting
through (1) ten-fold cross-validation on the 1000-headlin es dataset and (2) using the 1000 headlines
as training data and testing on the 250-headlines dataset (C haﬀar and Inkpen, 2011).
Other datasets with sentence-level annotations of emotion s include about 4000 sentences from
blogs, compiled by Aman and Szpakowicz (2007); 1000 sentenc es from stories on topics such as
education and health, compiled by Neviarouskaya et al. (2009); and about 4000 sentences from fairy
tales, annotated by Alm and Sproat (2005).

--- PAGE 5 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 5
2.3. Personality Detection
Personality has signiﬁcant impact on our lives—for example , on job performance (Tett et al. ,
1991), inter-personal relations (White et al. , 2004), on the products we buy (Lastovicka and Joachim-
sthaler, 1988), and even on our health and well-being (Hayes and Joseph, 2003). The ﬁve-factor or
the big ﬁve model of personality describes personality alon g the dimensions listed below:
• extroversion vs. introversion: sociable, assertive vs. al oof, shy
• neuroticism vs. emotional stability: insecure, anxious vs . calm, unemotional
• agreeability vs. disagreeability: friendly, cooperative vs. antagonistic, fault-ﬁnding
• conscientiousness vs. unconscientiousness: self-discip lined, organized vs. ineﬃcient, careless
• openness to experience vs. conventionality: intellectual , insightful vs. shallow, unimaginative
There exist other models of personality too, such as the Myer s-Brigg Type Indicator (Myers, 1962;
Myers et al. , 1985). However, the big ﬁve model has been accepted more wid ely by the research
community. The ﬁve dimensions listed above have been shown t o entail various other personality
traits.
Traditionally, personality is determined through speciﬁc questionnaires. However, automatically
identifying personality from free-form text is far more des irable. Some of the earliest work on
automatic personality detection was by Pennebaker and King (1999). They asked students to write
stream-of-consciousness essays, that is, unedited pieces of text written in one sitting, detailing what
was in their mind without conscious eﬀort to structure their thoughts. The students were later
provided with questionnaires to assess their Big 5 personal ity traits. Pennebaker and King (1999) used
lexical categories from Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ( LIWC) to identify linguistic correlates
of personality. 2 They showed, for example, that agreeability is characteriz ed with more positive
emotion words and fewer articles and that neurotism is chara cterized with more negative emotion
words and more ﬁrst-person pronouns. Openness to experienc e is correlated with longer words and
avoidance of ﬁrst-person pronouns, and conscientiousness with fewer negations and negative words.
Mairesse et al. (2007) improved on these features and distribute their syst em online. 3 They also use
features such as imageability from the MRC Psycholinguisti c Database Machine Usable Dictionary. 4
Both Pennebaker and King (1999) and Mairesse et al. (2007) worked with the Essays dataset. More
recently, there has also been work on personality detection from blogs (Yarkoni, 2010), collections of
Facebook posts (Kosinski et al. , 2013), and collections of Twitter posts and follower netwo rk (Qiu
et al. , 2012). There also exist websites that analyze blogs and dis play the personality types of the
authors.5
Plutchik (1962) states that persistent situations involvi ng emotions produce persistent traits
or personality. For example, if one is angry most of the time, then anger or related phenomenon
such as aggressiveness become part of the personality. Emot ions are considered to be more transient
phenomenon whereas personality is more constant. In Sectio n 7, we show for the ﬁrst time that
ﬁne-grained emotion categories are useful in detecting var ious personality traits from stream-of-
consciousness essays and collections of facebook posts.
3. CREATING EMOTION-LABELED TEXT FROM TWEETS
Sometimes people use hashtags to notify others of the emotio ns associated with the message
they are tweeting. Table 2 shows a few examples. On reading ju st the message before the hashtags,
most people will agree that the tweeter #1 is sad, tweeter #2 i s happy, and tweeter #3 is angry.
However, there also exist tweets such as the fourth example, where reading just the message be-
fore the hashtag does not convey the emotions of the tweeter. Here, the hashtag provides information
not present (implicitly or explicitly) in the rest of the mes sage. There are also tweets, such as those
shown in examples 5 and 6, that do not seem to express the emoti ons stated in the hashtags. This
2http://www.liwc.net
3http://people.csail.mit.edu/francois/research/personality/recognizer.html
4http://ota.oucs.ox.ac.uk/headers/1054.xml
5http://www.typealyzer.com

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Computational Intelligence
Table 2. Example tweets with emotion-words hashtags.
1. Feeling left out... #sadness
2. My amazing memory saves the day again! #joy
3. Some jerk stole my photo on tumblr. #anger
4. Mika used my photo on tumblr. #anger
5. School is very boring today :/ #joy
6. to me.... YOU are ur only #fear
may occur for many reasons including the use of sarcasm or iro ny. Additional context is required to
understand the full emotional import of many tweets. Tweets tend to be very short, and often have
spelling mistakes, short forms, and various other properti es that make such text diﬃcult to process
by natural language systems. Further, it is probable, that o nly a small portion of emotional tweets
are hashtagged with emotion words.
Our goal in this paper is to determine if we can successfully u se emotion-word hashtags as
emotion labels despite the many challenges outlined above:
• Can we create a large corpus of emotion-labeled hashtags?
• Are the emotion annotations consistent, despite the large n umber of annotators, despite no control
over their socio-economic and cultural background, despit e the many ways in which hashtags are
used, and despite the many idiosyncracies of tweets?
• Do the hashtag annotations match with the intuitions of trai ned judges?
We chose to ﬁrst collect tweets with hashtags corresponding to the six Ekman emotions: #anger,
#disgust, #fear, #happy, #sadness, and #surprise. (Eventually, we collected tweets with hashtags
corresponding to hundreds of emotions (as described in Sect ion 6), but not before ﬁrst validating
the usefulness of hashtagged tweets for the basic emotions ( Section 4).)
Eisenstein et al. (2010) collected about 380,000 tweets 6 from Twitter’s oﬃcial API. 7 Similarly,
Go et al. (2009) collected 1.6 million tweets. 8 However, these datasets had less than 50 tweets that
contained emotion-word hashtags. Therefore, we abandoned the search-in-corpora approach in favor
of the one described below.
3.1. Hashtag-based Search on the Twitter Search API
The Archivist 9 is a free online service that helps users extract tweets usin g Twitter’s Search
API.10 For any given query, Archivist ﬁrst obtains up to 1500 tweets from the previous seven days.
Subsequently, it polls the Twitter Search API every few hour s to obtain newer tweets that match
the query. We supplied Archivist with the six hashtag querie s corresponding to the Ekman emotions,
and collected about 50,000 tweets posted between November 1 5, 2011 and December 6, 2011.
We discarded tweets that had fewer than three valid English w ords. We used the Roget Thesaurus
as the lexicon of English words. 11 This helped ﬁlter out most, if not all, of the non-English twe ets
that had English emotion hashtags. It also eliminated tweet s that were essentially very short phrases,
and tweets with very bad spelling. We discarded tweets with t he preﬁx “Rt”, “RT”, and “rt”, which
indicate that the messages that follow are re-tweets (re-po stings of tweets sent earlier by somebody
else). Like Gonz´ alez-Ib´ a˜ nezet al. (2011), we removed tweets that did not have the hashtag of int erest
at the end of the message. It has been suggested that middle-o f-tweet hashtags may not be good
labels of the tweets. 12 Finally, we were left with about 21,000 tweets, which formed the Hashtag
Emotion Corpus (6 emotions) or Hashtag Emotion Corpus for short.
6http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/GeoText
7https://dev.twitter.com/docs/streaming-api
8https://sites.google.com/site/twittersentimenthelp
9http://archivist.visitmix.com
10https://dev.twitter.com/docs/using-search
11Roget’s Thesaurus: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10681
12End-of-message hashtags are also much more common than hash tags at other positions.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 7
Table 3. Details of the Hashtag Emotion Corpus (6 emotions).
# of % of
hashtag instances instances
#anger 1,555 7.4
#disgust 761 3.6
#fear 2,816 13.4
#joy 8,240 39.1
#sadness 3,830 18.2
#surprise 3,849 18.3
Total tweets 21,051 100.0
# of tweeters 19,059
3.2. Distribution of emotion-word hashtags
Table 3 presents some details of the Hashtag Emotion Corpus. 13 Note that the number of tweets
with emotion hashtags in the Hashtag Emotion Corpus is an ord er of magnitude bigger than the
the number of instances in emotion-labeled headlines and bl og sentences. Observe also that the
distribution of emotions in the Hashtag Emotion Corpus is ve ry diﬀerent from the distribution of
emotions in the 1000-Headlines Corpus (see Table 1). There a re more messages tagged with the
hashtag #joy than any of the other basic emotions.
Synonyms can often be used to express the same concept or emot ion. Thus it is possible that
the true distribution of hashtags corresponding to emotion s is diﬀerent from what is shown in Table
3. In the future, we intend to collect tweets with synonyms of joy, sadness, fear, etc., as well.
4. CONSISTENCY AND USEFULNESS OF HASHTAG EMOTION CORPUS
As noted earlier, even with trained judges, emotion annotat ion obtains only a modest inter-
annotator agreement (see Table 1). As shown in Table 3, the Ha shtag Emotion Corpus has about
21,000 tweets from about 19,000 diﬀerent people. If the Hash tag Emotion Corpus were to be treated
as manually annotated data (which in one sense, it is), then i t is data created by a very large number
of judges, and most judges have annotated just one instance. Therefore, an important question is to
determine whether the hashtag annotations of the tens of tho usands of tweeters are consistent with
one another. It will also be worth determining if this large a mount of emotion-tagged Twitter data
can help improve emotion detection in sentences from other d omains.
To answer these questions, we conducted two automatic emoti on classiﬁcation experiments
described in the two sub-sections below. Since a particular piece of text may convey more than one
emotion (it may have more than one emotion label), we use one- vs-all classiﬁers as they handle multi-
label problems elegantly. For example, the Anger–NotAnger classiﬁer may determine that the text
expresses anger, and the Disgust–NotDisgust classiﬁer may determine that the text conveys disgust
as well. For our experiments, we created one-vs-all classiﬁ ers for each of the six basic emotions using
Weka (Hall et al. , 2009). 14 We treated the emotion hashtags as class labels and removed t hem from
the tweets. Thus a classiﬁer has to determine that a tweet exp resses anger, for example, without
having access to the hashtag #anger.
We chose Support Vector Machines (SVM) with Sequential Mini mal Optimization (Platt, 1999)
as the machine learning algorithm because of its successful application in various research problems.
We used binary features that captured the presence or absenc e of unigrams and bigrams. In order
to set a suitable benchmark for experiments with the Hashtag Emotion Corpus, we ﬁrst applied the
classiﬁers to the SemEval-2007 Aﬀective Text corpus. We exe cuted ten-fold cross-validation on the
1000-Headlines dataset. We experimented with using all ngr ams (one-word and two-word sequences),
as well as training on only those ngrams that occurred more th an once in the training data. 15
13W e use the number of unique user names as an approximation of t he number of tweeters. It is possible
that a person may have used more than one user name.
14http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka
15W e tokenize the text by putting white space before and after e very punctuation mark.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Computational Intelligence
Table 4. Cross-validation results on the 1000-headlines dataset. #gold is the number of
headlines expressing a particular emotion. #right is the number of these instances the classiﬁer
correctly marked as expressing the emotion. #guesses is the number of instances marked as expressing
an emotion by the classiﬁer.
Label ( X) #gold #right #guesses P R F
I. System using ngrams with freq. > 1
anger 132 35 71 49.3 26.5 34.5
disgust 43 8 19 42.1 18.6 25.8
fear 247 108 170 63.5 43.7 51.8
joy 344 155 287 54.0 45.1 49.1
sadness 283 104 198 52.5 36.7 43.2
surprise 253 74 167 44.3 29.2 35.2
All labels 1302 484 912 53.1 37.2 43.7
II. System using all ngrams (no ﬁltering)
All labels 1302 371 546 67.9 28.5 40.1
III. System that guesses randomly
All labels 1302 651 3000 21.7 50.0 30.3
The rows under I in Table 4 give a breakdown of results obtaine d by the EmotionX–NotEmotionX
classiﬁers when they ignored single-occurrence n-grams (w here X is one of the six basic emotions).
#gold is the number of headlines expressing a particular emotion X. EmotionX is treated as the
the positive class, and NotEmotionX is treated a the negativ e class. Therefore, #right is chosen
to be the number of instances that the classiﬁer correctly ma rked as expressing X. (Thus if the
classiﬁer correctly marks an expression with NotEmotionX, then #right is not aﬀected.) #guesses is
the number of instances marked as expressing X by the classiﬁer. Precision ( P ) and recall ( R) are
calculated as shown below:
P = #right
#guesses ∗ 100 (1)
R = #right
#gold ∗ 100 (2)
F is the balanced F-score. The All labels row shows the sums of #gold, #right, and #guesses.
Overall precision, recall, and F-score are calculated by pl ugging these values in equations 1 and 2.
Thus 43.7 is the micro-average F-score obtained by these ngr am classiﬁers. 16 The II and III rows
in the table show overall results obtained by a system that us es all ngrams and by a system that
guesses randomly. 17 It is not surprising that the emotion classes with the most tr aining instances
and the highest inter-annotator agreement (joy, sadness, a nd fear) are also the classes on which the
classiﬁers perform best (see Table 1). We found that bigrams gave small improvements (about 1 to
2 F-score points) over and above the results obtained with un igrams alone.
The F-score of 40.1 obtained using all ngrams is close to 39.6 obtained by Chaﬀar and Inkpen
(2011)—a sanity check for our baseline system. Ignoring wor ds that occur only once in the training
data seems beneﬁcial. All classiﬁcation results shown belo w are for the cases when ngrams that
occurred only once were ﬁltered out.
16One may choose macro-averaged F-score or micro-averaged F- score as the bottom-line statistic depending
on whether one wants to give equal weight to all classes or one wants to give equal weight to each classiﬁcation
decision. W e chose micro-average F-score since it has been a metric of choice for recent emotion analysis
competitions such as the 2011 I2B2 competition on detecting emotions in suicide notes (Cherry et al. , 2012).
17A system that randomly guesses whether an instance is expres sing an emotion X or not will get half of
the #gold instances right. Further, the system will mark half of all th e instances as expressing emotion X.
For All labels ,
#right = #gold
2 , and # guesses = #instances∗6
2 .

--- PAGE 9 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 9
Table 5. Cross-validation results on the Hashtag Emotion Corpus. Th e highest F-score is
shown in bold.
Label #gold #right #guesses P R F
I. System using ngrams with freq. > 1
anger 1555 347 931 37.3 22.31 27.9
disgust 761 102 332 30.7 13.4 18.7
fear 2816 1236 2073 59.6 43.9 50.6
joy 8240 4980 7715 64.5 60.4 62.4
sadness 3830 1377 3286 41.9 36.0 38.7
surprise 3849 1559 3083 50.6 40.5 45.0
All labels 21051 9601 17420 55.1 45.6 49.9
II. System that guesses randomly
All labels 21051 10525 63,153 16.7 50.0 21.7
Table 6. Results on the 250-headlines dataset. Highest F-scores in I and II are shown in bold.
# of features P R F
I. System using ngrams in training data:
a. the 1000-headlines text (target domain) 1,181 40.2 32.1 3 5.7
b. the Hashtag Emotion Corpus (source domain) 32,954 29.9 26 .1 27.9
c. the 1000-headlines text and the Hashtag Emotion Corpus (t arget and source)
c.1. no domain adaptation 33,902 41.7 35.5 38.3
c.2. with domain adaptation 101,706 46.0 35.5 40.1
II. System using ngrams in 1000-headlines and:
a. the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon 1,181 + 6 44.4 35.3 39.3
b. the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon 1,181 + 6 39.7 30.5 34.5
c. the NRC Emotion Lexicon 1,181 + 10 46.7 38.6 42.2
III. System that guesses randomly - 27.8 50.0 35.7
4.1. Experiment I: Can a classiﬁer learn to predict emotion h ashtags?
We applied the binary classiﬁers described above to the Hash tag Emotion Corpus. Table 5
shows the ten-fold cross-validation results. Observe that even though the Hashtag Emotion Corpus
was created from tens of thousands of users, the automatic cl assiﬁers are able to predict the emotions
(hashtags) with F-scores much higher than the random baseli ne, and also higher than those obtained
on the 1000-headlines corpus. Note also that this is despite the fact that the random baseline for
the 1000-headlines corpus ( F = 30 .3) is higher than the random baseline for the Hashtag Emotion
Corpus ( F = 21 .7). The results suggest that emotion hashtags assigned to tw eets are consistent to
a degree such that they can be used for detecting emotion hash tags in other tweets.
Expectedly, the Joy–NotJoy classiﬁer gets the best results as it has the highest number o f
training instances. The Sadness–NotSadness classiﬁer performed relatively poorly considering the
amount of training instances available, whereas the Fear-NotFearclassiﬁer performed relatively well.
It is possible that people use less overt cues in tweets when t hey are explicitly giving it a sadness
hashtag.
4.2. Experiment II: Can the Hashtag Emotion Corpus help impr ove emotion classiﬁcation in a
diﬀerent domain?
Usually, supervised algorithms perform well when training and test data are from the same
domain. However, domain adaptation algorithms may be used t o combine training data in the target
domain with large amounts of training data from a diﬀerent so urce domain. Several successful domain
adaptation techniques have been proposed in the last few yea rs including those by Daum´ e (2007),
Blitzer et al. (2007), and Ganchev et al. (2012). We used the one proposed by Daum´ e (2007) in our
experiments, mainly because of its simplicity.
The Daum´ e (2007) approach involves the transformation of the original training instance feature
vector into a new space made up of three copies of the original vector. The three copies correspond
to the target domain, the source domain, and the general doma in. If X represents an original feature

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 Computational Intelligence
vector from the target domain , then it is transformed into XOX, where O is a zero vector. If X
represents original feature vector from the source domain , then it is transformed into OXX. This
data is given to the learning algorithm, which learns inform ation speciﬁc to the target domain,
speciﬁc to the source domain, as well as information that app lies to both domains. The test instance
feature vector (which is from the target domain) is transfor med to XOX. Therefore, the classiﬁer
applies information speciﬁc to the target domain as well as i nformation common to both the target
and source domains, but not information speciﬁc only to the s ource domain.
In this section, we describe experiments on using the Hashta g Emotion Corpus for emotion
classiﬁcation in the newspaper headlines domain. We applie d our binary emotion classiﬁers on
unseen test data from the newspaper headlines domain—the 25 0-Headlines dataset—using each
of the following as a training corpus:
• Target-domain data: the 1000-Headlines data.
• Source-domain data: the Hashtag Emotion Corpus.
• Target and Source data: A joint corpus of the 1000-Headlines set and the Hashtag Emotion Corpus.
Additionally, when using the ‘Target and Source’ data, we al so tested the domain adaptation
algorithm proposed in Daum´ e (2007). Since the EmotionX class (the positive class) has markedly
fewer instances than the NotEmotionX class, we assigned higher weight to instances of the positiv e
class during training. 18 The rows under I in Table 6 give the results. (Row II results ar e for the
experiment described in Section 6, and can be ignored for now .)
The micro-averaged F-score when using target-domain data ( row I.a.) is identical to the score
obtained by the random baseline (row III). However, observe that the precision of the ngram system
is higher than the random system, and its recall is lower. Thi s suggests that the test data has many
n-grams not previously seen in the training data. Observe th at as expected, using source-domain
data produces much lower scores (row I.b.) than when using ta rget-domain training data (row I.a.).
Using both target- and source-domain data produced signiﬁc antly better results (row I.c.1.)
than using target-domain data alone (I.a.). Applying the do main adaptation technique described
in Daum´ e (2007), obtained even better results (row I.c.2.) . The use of Hashtag Emotion Corpus
improved both precision and recall over just using the targe t-domain text. This shows that the
Hashtag Emotion Corpus can be leveraged, preferably with a s uitable domain adaptation algorithm,
to improve emotion classiﬁcation results even on datasets f rom a diﬀerent domain. It is also a
validation of the premise that the self-labeled emotion has htags are consistent, at least to some
degree, with the emotion labels given by trained human judge s.
5. CREATING THE HASHTAG EMOTION LEXICON
Word–emotion association lexicons are lists of words and as sociated emotions. For example, the
word victory may be associated with the emotions of joy and relief. These e motion lexicons have
many applications, including automatically highlighting words and phrases to quickly convey regions
of aﬀect in a piece of text. Mohammad (2012b) shows that these lexicon features can signiﬁcantly
improve classiﬁer performance over and above that obtained using ngrams alone.
WordNet Aﬀect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) includes 1 536 words with associations to the
six Ekman emotions. 19 Mohammad and colleagues compiled emotion annotations for a bout 14,000
words by crowdsourcing to Mechanical Turk (Mohammad and Tur ney, 2013; Mohammad and Yang,
2011).20 This lexicon, referred to as the NRC Emotion Lexicon, has ann otations for eight emotions
(six of Ekman, trust, and anticipation) as well as for positi ve and negative sentiment. 21 Here, we
show how we created an ngram–emotion association lexicons f rom emotion-labeled sentences in the
Hashtag Emotion Corpus.
18For example, for the anger–NotAnger classiﬁer, if 10 out of 110 instances have the label anger, th en they
are each given a weight of 10, whereas the rest are given a weig ht of 1.
19http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaﬀect.html
20http://www.purl.org/net/saif.mohammad/research
21Plutchik (1985) proposed a model of 8 basic emotions.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 11
Table 7. Number of word types in emotion lexicons.
Emotion lexicon # of word types
1000-Headlines Lexicon (6 emotions) 152
Hashtag Emotion Lexicon (6 emotions) 11,418
WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon (6 emotions) 1,536
NRC Emotion Lexicon (8 emotions) 14,000
5.1. Method
Given a dataset of sentences and associated emotion labels, we compute the Strength of Asso-
ciation (SoA) between an n-gram w and an emotion e to be:
SoA(w, e) = PMI (w, e) − PMI (w, ¬e) (3)
where PMI is the pointwise mutual information.
PMI (w, e) = log 2
freq(w, e) ∗ N
freq(w) ∗ freq(e) (4)
where freq(w, e) is the number of times w occurs in a sentence with label e.
freq(w) and freq(e) are the frequencies of w and e in the labeled corpus.
N is the number of words in the dataset.
PMI (w, ¬e) = log 2
freq(w, ¬e) ∗ N
freq(w) ∗ freq(¬e) (5)
where freq(w, ¬e) is the number of times n occurs in a sentence that does not have the label e.
freq(¬e) is the number of sentences that do not have the label e. Thus, equation 4 is simpliﬁed to:
SoA(w, e) = log 2
freq(w, e) ∗ freq(¬e)
freq(e) ∗ freq(w, ¬e) (6)
Since PMI is known to be a poor estimator of association for lo w-frequency events, we ignore ngrams
that occur less than ﬁve times.
If an n-gram has a stronger tendency to occur in a sentence wit h a particular emotion label,
than in a sentence that does not have that label, then that ngr am–emotion pair will have an SoA
score that is greater than zero.
5.2. Emotion lexicons created from the 1000-headlines data set and the Hashtag Emotion Corpus
We calculated SoA scores for the unigrams and bigrams in the H ashtag Emotion Corpus with the
six basic emotions. All ngram–emotion pairs that obtained s cores greater than zero were extracted
to from the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon (6 emotions) (Hashtag Lexicon for short). We repeated these
steps for the 1000-headlines dataset as well. Table 7 shows t he number of word types in the two
automatically generated and the two manually created lexic ons (WordNet Aﬀect and NRC Emotion
lexicon). Observe that the 1000-headlines dataset produce s very few entries, whereas the large size
of the Hashtag Emotion Corpus enables the creation of a subst antial emotion lexicon.
The Hashtag Emotion Lexicon should not be confused with the N RC Emotion Lexicon. The
NRC Emotion Lexicon was created in 2011 by manual annotation through Mechanical Turk, whereas
the Hashtag Lexicon was created automatically from tweets w ith emotion-word hashtags posted in
2012. The NRC Emotion Lexicon has binary association score ( 0 or 1), whereas the Hashtag Lexicon
provides real-valued scores that indicate the degree of wor d–emotion association (higher scores imply
higher association).
5.3. Evaluating the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon
We evaluate the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon by using it for class ifying emotions in a setting similar
to the one discussed in the previous section. The test set is t he 250-headlines dataset. The training
set is the 1000-headlines dataset. We used binary features t hat captured the presence or absence of

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 Computational Intelligence
unigrams and bigrams just as before. Additionally, we also u sed integer-valued aﬀect features that
captured the number of word tokens in a sentence associated w ith diﬀerent emotions labels in the
Hashtag Emotion Lexicon and the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon. For e xample, if a sentence has two joy
words and one surprise word, then the joy feature has value 2, surprise has value 1, and all remaining
aﬀect features have value 0. 22
We know from the results in Table 6 (I.a. and I.c) that using th e Hashtag Emotion Corpus
in addition to the 1000-headlines training data signiﬁcant ly improves results. Now we investigate
whether the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon can similarly improve p erformance. The rows under II in
Table 6 give the results.
Observe that even though the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon is a der ivative of the hashtag Emotion
Corpus that includes fewer unigrams and bigrams, the classi ﬁers using the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon
produces an F-score (row II.a.) signiﬁcantly higher than in the scenarios of I.a. and almost as
high as in I.c.2. This shows that the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon successfully captures the word–
emotion associations that are latent in the Hashtag Emotion Corpus. We also ﬁnd that the classiﬁers
perform signiﬁcantly better when using the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon (row II.a.) than when using
the WordNet Aﬀect Lexicon (row II.b.), but not as well as when using the NRC Emotion Lexicon
(row II.c.). The strong results of the NRC Emotion Lexicon ar e probably because of its size and
because it was created by manual annotation of words for emot ions, which required signiﬁcant time
and eﬀort. On the other hand, the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon can be easily improved further by
compiling an even larger set of tweets using synonyms and mor phological variants of the emotion
words used thus far.
6. EXTENDING THE EMOTION-LABELED DATASET AND THE EMOTION
LEXICON TO INCLUDE HUNDREDS OF FINE EMOTION CATEGORIES
The previous sections show that emotion-word hashtagged tw eets are a good source of labeled
data for automatic emotion processing. Those experiments w ere conducted using tweets pertaining
to the six Ekman emotions because labeled evaluation data ex ists for only those emotions. However,
a signiﬁcant advantage of using hashtagged tweets is that we can collect large amounts of labeled
data for any emotion that is used as a hashtag by tweeters. Thu s we polled the Twitter API and
collected a large corpus of tweets pertaining to a few hundre d emotions.
We used a list of 585 emotion words compiled by Zeno G. Swijtin k as the hashtagged query
words.23 Note that we chose not to dwell on the question of whether each of the words in this set is
truly an emotion or not. Our goal was to create and distribute a large set of aﬀect-labeled data, and
users are free to choose a subset of the data that is relevant t o their application. The ﬁnal corpus,
which we call the Hashtag Emotion Corpus (585 emotions) , has 2,914,085 tweets in all, each with at
least one of the 585 emotion words as a hashtagged word. This i s the ﬁrst text collection labeled for
hundreds of emotions.
We generated a word–emotion association lexicon from these 2,914,085 tweets just as described
earlier in Section 5. We call it the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon (585 emotions) . In total, it has 15,825
entries, where as entry is a word–emotion pair and an associa tion score. This is the ﬁrst word-emotion
association lexicon that has real-valued association scor es for hundreds of emotions (previous lexicons
involved only a handful of emotions, and often had 0 or 1 assoc iation values).
For the rest of the paper, we will only make use of the Hashtag E motion Corpus (585 emotions)
and the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon (585 emotions), and not the 6 -emotions version described in
Sections 3, 4, and 5. Thus, we will refer to the Hashtag Emotio n Corpus (585 emotions) simply
as the Hashtag Emotion Corpus and the Hashtag Emotion Lexico n (585 emotions) simply as the
Hashtag Emotion Lexicon for short. We will now show the use of the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon in
an extrinsic task—detecting personality from written text .
22Normalizing by sentence length did not give better results.
23http://www.sonoma.edu/users/s/swijtink/teaching/philosophy 101/paper1/listemotions.htm

--- PAGE 13 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 13
7. DETECTING PERSONALITY USING FINE EMOTION CATEGORIES
We investigate the relationship between emotions and perso nality using the Hashtag Emotion
Lexicon (with its hundreds of emotion associations) over a p ersonality detection task. The goal of
personality detection from text is to automatically analyz e free-form text written by a person in
order to infer her personality traits, such as extroversion and neuroticism.
We detect personality in two datasets: stream-of-consciousness essays and collections of Facebook
status updates. The Essays dataset was collected by Penneba ker and King (1999). It consists of 2,469
essays (1.9 million words) by psychology students. The Face book dataset is a collection of 10,000
Facebook posts (status updates) by 250 users. We concatenat ed all status updates by a user into
a single text that was fed to our system. Both datasets were pr ovided as part of a shared task in
the Workshop on Computational Personality Detection. 24 Personality was assessed by asking the
students to respond to a Big Five Inventory Questionnaire (J ohn and Srivastava, 1999).
We ﬁrst build a number of baseline classiﬁers that rely on com monly used features for personality
detection. Some of these baselines use coarse aﬀect feature s about evaluativeness (positive and
negative sentiment) and coarse emotion categories (the six basic emotion categories). We then
add features drawn from the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon to deter mine if using features pertaining
to hundreds of ﬁne emotions improves performance over an abo ve the baselines. The subsections
below describe some of the lexicons used to obtain features f or baseline systems, the personality
classiﬁcation system (classiﬁer and features used), and ou r experiments on the two datasets.
7.1. Lexicons used to obtain features for the baseline syste ms
7.1.1. Speciﬁcity Lexicon. Gill and Oberlander (2002), and later Mairesse et al. (2007), show
that people with a neurotic personality tend to use concrete words more frequently. Inspired by
this, we explore if people of a certain personality type tend to use terms with high speciﬁcity. The
speciﬁcity of a term is a measure of how general or speciﬁc the referred concept is. For example,
entity is a very general concept whereas ball-point pen is a very speciﬁc concept.
Resnik (1995) showed that speciﬁcity or information conten t of WordNet synsets can be ac-
curately determined by using corpus counts. Pedersen pre-c omputed information content scores for
82,115 WordNet noun synsets and 13,708 verb synsets using th e British National Corpus (BNC).
We created a word-level information content lexicon by ﬁrst mapping the words to their synsets,
and then assigning the words with information content score s of the corresponding synsets. If a
word is associated with more than one synset, then the synset with the highest information content
is chosen. The ﬁnal lexicon had 66,464 noun entries and 6,439 verb entries. In contrast with the
Hashtag Lexicon, which has ﬁne emotion categories, the spec iﬁcity lexicon captures how general
or speciﬁc a word is, without regard to whether it is associat ed with an emotion or not. Thus a
comparative experiment with the speciﬁcity features sheds light on whether the Hashtag Lexicon is
useful because of information from ﬁne emotion categories or simply because of information from
ﬁne categories (emotional or otherwise). We computed the av erage information content of the words
in the input text and used it as a feature in our machine learni ng system.
7.1.2. Coarse Aﬀect Lexicon 1: Osgood Lexicon. Osgood et al. (1957) asked human subjects
to rate words on various scales such as complete–incomplete , harmonious–dissonant, and high–low.
They then performed a factor analysis of these ratings to dis cover that most of the variation was due
to three dimensions: evaluativeness ( good–bad), activity ( active–passive, large–small ), and potency
(sharp–dull, fast–slow ). Turney and Littman (2003) proposed a method to automatica lly calculate a
word’s evaluativeness score using a vector space model and w ord–word co-occurrence counts in text.
Turney later generated lexicons of word–evaluativeness sc ores and additionally lexicons of word–
activity and word–potency scores for 114,271 words from Wor dNet. In contrast with the Hashtag
Lexicon, which has hundreds of ﬁne-grained aﬀect categorie s, the Osgood Lexicon has only three
coarse aﬀect categories (evaluativeness, activity, and po tency). We used these lexicons and computed
the average evaluativeness, activity, and potency scores o f the words in the text to be classiﬁed.
24http://mypersonality.org/wiki/doku.php?id=wcpr13

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 Computational Intelligence
7.1.3. Coarse Aﬀect Lexicon 2: NRC Emotion Lexicon. The NRC Emotion Lexicon has about
14,000 words annotated for eight emotions (six of Ekman, tru st, and anticipation) as well as for
positive and negative sentiment. In contrast with the Hasht ag Lexicon, which has hundreds of ﬁne-
grained aﬀect categories, the NRC Emotion Lexicon has eight coarse categories. For each of the eight
emotions, we used as features the average number of emotion w ords in the text to be classiﬁed.
7.1.4. Emotion Clusters Lexicon. Consider a multi-dimensional space where each of the words i n
the vocabulary is a dimension. A ﬁne-grained emotion catego ry can be positioned in this space using
the list of words and real-valued association scores with th e emotion (as in the Hashtag Lexicon). We
calculated the similarity between two emotions in this spac e by the cosine of the two corresponding
vectors. Finally, we clustered the 585 emotions into eight g roups by repeated bisection using the
clustering tool CLUTO (Karypis, 2003). We then created a wor d–cluster association lexicon from
tweets where the hashtagged ﬁne emotion category was replac ed by the corresponding cluster (just as
described in Section 5). In contrast with the Hashtag Lexico n and just as the NRC Emotion Lexicon,
the word–cluster lexicon has eight coarse categories. Howe ver, unlike the NRC Emotion Lexicon,
the word–cluster lexicon has the same vocabulary as the Hash tag Lexicon. Thus a comparative
experiment with the cluster lexicon tells us more clearly wh ether ﬁne-emotion categories are useful
for personality detection. We used as features, the average of the cluster association score for each
of the eight emotion clusters in the input text.
7.2. System Description
Classiﬁer: We trained ﬁve binary Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁe rs, one for each of the ﬁve
personality dimensions: extroversion (EXT), neurotism (N EU), agreeability (AGR), conscientious-
ness (CON), and openness (OPN). SVM is a state-of-the-art le arning algorithm proven to be eﬀective
on text categorization tasks and robust on large feature spa ces. In each experiment, the results were
averaged over ten runs of stratiﬁed cross-validation. We us ed the LibSVM package (Chang and Lin,
2011) with a linear kernel.
The essays dataset is well-balanced in the number of instanc es in each class for each of the
personality dimensions. (The highest skew is 53%–47% for th e AGR–NotAGR dimension.) However,
the Facebook posts dataset is much more skewed. (For example , 70%–30% for the OPN–NotOPN
dimension.) Thus we used the essays dataset as is, but employ ed the following strategy for the
Facebook posts. During each of the ten cross-validation run s, for each personality trait, we randomly
select N instances of a majority class, where N is the number of instances in the minority class.
Features: Each input text was represented by the following groups of fe atures:
a. Mairesse Baseline (MB): This is the complete set of featur es used by Mairesse et al. (2007). Some
of these features are listed below: word count, words per sen tence, type/token ratio, words longer
than six letters, negations, assents, articles, prepositi ons, numbers, pronouns (ﬁrst person, second
person, third person), emotion words, cognition words ( insight, tentative), sensory and perceptual
words ( see, hear), social processes words ( chat, friend ), time words, space words, motion words,
punctuations, and swear words.
b. Token unigrams: Frequencies of tokens divided by the tota l number of tokens in an input text.
c. Average Information Content: Average information conte nt of the text, calculated using the
Speciﬁcity Lexicon.
d. Features from the Osgood Lexicon - CoarseAﬀ (Osgood Lexic on): Average potency of the text,
average evaluativeness of the text, and the average activit y score of the text.
e. Features from the NRC Emotion Lexicon - CoarseAﬀ (NRC Emot ion Lexicon): Average number
of emotion words for each of the 8 emotions in the NRC Emotion L exicon.
f. Features from Hashtag Emotion Lexicon - FineEmo (Hashtag Emotion Lexicon): Average of the
emotion association score for each of the 585 emotions in the Hashtag Lexicon.
g. Features from the Cluster Lexicon - CoarseAﬀ (Cluster Lex icon): Average of the cluster associ-
ation score for each of the 8 clusters in the input text.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 15
Table 8. Accuracy of automatic classiﬁcation of essays into the big ﬁ ve dimensions of
personality. Combination is the system that combines exactly those features that prov ide signiﬁcant
improvement over the majority classiﬁer baseline when used individually. The features combined for
the ﬁve dimensions are as follows: for EXT: a + f; for NEU: a + d + e + f; for AGR: a + f; for
CON: a + d + e + f; and for OPN: a + d + f. All statistically signiﬁc ant improvements ( p < . 05)
over the majority baseline are marked with a *. All statistic ally signiﬁcant improvements ( p < . 05)
over the Mairesse Baseline are shown in bold.
EXT NEU AGR CON OPN
Majority Classiﬁer 51.74 50.04 53.08 50.81 51.54
SVM Classiﬁer
a. Mairesse Baseline (MB) 55.13* 58.09* 55.35* 55.28* 59.57 *
b. Unigrams 51.74 50.04 53.08 50.81 51.54
c. Average Information Content 51.74 50.09 53.08 50.64 51.5 4
d. CoarseAﬀ (Osgood Lexicon)
Activity 51.68 53.76* 53.04 51.78* 54.61*
Evaluative 51.67 52.78* 53.01 54.81* 52.20*
Potency 51.77 53.31* 53.06 51.62* 52.61*
All three 51.58 54.52* 52.95 54.38* 57.32*
e. CoarseAﬀ (NRC Emotion Lexicon) 51.74 51.05* 53.10* 51.28 * 51.54
f. FineEmo (Hashtag Emotion Lexicon) 55.29* 55.75* 56.03* 56.54* 60.68*
g. MB + CoarseAﬀ
Activity 55.25* 58.21* 55.33* 55.20* 59.49*
Evaluative 55.39* 58.12* 55.32* 55.44* 59.42*
Potency 55.25* 58.33* 55.25* 55.27* 59.64*
All three 55.34* 58.31* 55.15* 55.51* 59.64*
h. MB + CoarseAﬀ (NRC Emotion Lexicon) 55.24* 58.33* 55.37* 55.45* 59.60*
i. MB + FineEmo (Hashtag Emotion Lexicon) 56.45* 58.26* 55.13* 56.73* 60.64*
j. Combination 56.45* 58.04* 55.13* 56.68* 60.62*
k. FineEmo-clusters 51.74 50.97* 53.09 52.11* 58.11*
7.3. Experiments on the Essays Dataset
7.3.1. Results. Upon classiﬁcation, the results were compared with the gold labels of yes or no for
each of the ﬁve personality dimensions. Table 8 shows the acc uracies of the yes and no labels for the
ﬁve personality classes extroversion (EXT), neurotism (NE U), agreeability (AGR), conscientiousness
(CON), and openness (OPN). We also present the results for a s imple baseline classiﬁer that always
predicts the majority class. All statistically signiﬁcant improvements ( p < 0.05) over the majority
baseline are marked with a *. All statistically signiﬁcant i mprovements (p < 0.05) over the Mairesse
Baseline are shown in bold.
The Mairesse Baseline performs signiﬁcantly better than th e majority baseline for all ﬁve
personality dimensions. Since the Mairesse Baseline is one of the well-known baselines in personality
detection, we compare performance of other feature groups w ith this baseline and show all results
that are signiﬁcantly higher than it in bold. Unigrams and av erage information content features fail to
improve results over the majority baseline. All three of the Osgood Lexicon features improve results
signiﬁcantly over the majority baseline for the NEU, CON, an d OPN classes (d rows), however, when
combined with the Mairesse et al. features, only the potency features improve results signiﬁcantly
over the Mairesse Baseline, and that too only for NEU (g rows) . The NRC Emotion lexicon features
lead to statistically signiﬁcant improvements over the maj ority baseline for the NEU, AGR and CON
classes (row e), however, when added to the Mairesse et al. fe atures, they improve results signiﬁcantly
over the Mairesse Baseline again only for NEU (row h). In cont rast to the coarse aﬀect features of
Osgood and NRC Emotion lexicon, the ﬁne emotion features of t he Hashtag Emotion Lexicon lead
to signiﬁcant improvements over the majority baseline in al l ﬁve personality classes. Observe also

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 Computational Intelligence
that the Hashtag Lexicon features alone obtain higher resul ts than the collection of features used in
the Mairesse Baseline for all personality dimensions, exce pt NEU. Adding these features on top of
the Mairesse Baseline leads to signiﬁcant improvements in t he EXT, CON, and OPN classes. These
results show that the ﬁne emotion categories from the Hashta g Lexicon are a particularly useful
source of features for detecting personality from written t ext.
Combination (row j) is the system that combines exactly those features th at provide signiﬁcant
improvement over the majority classiﬁer baseline when used individually. The features combined for
the ﬁve dimensions are as follows: for EXT: rows a + f; for NEU: rows a + d + e + f; for AGR: rows
a + f; for CON: rows a + d + e + f; and for OPN: rows a + d + f. Observe t hat the combinations
do not lead to better results than those obtained using just t he Mairesse Baseline and the Hashtag
Lexicon.
In order to determine whether the beneﬁt from the Hashtag Lex icon is due to the grouping of
terms into ﬁne categories or simply because of its vocabular y coverage, we present the results obtained
using the lexicon created by ﬁrst clustering the emotion has htags into eight coarse categories (row
k). We ﬁnd that the results obtained using the Hashtag Lexico n (row f) are signiﬁcantly better than
those obtained using the cluster lexicon (row k) for all ﬁve p ersonality dimensions.
7.3.2. Discussion. The fact that unigram features are not as helpful as in some ot her tasks
such as classiﬁcation of text by topic, is one of the reasons p ersonality detection is a relatively
hard problem. Nonetheless, the ﬁne-grained emotion featur es from the Hashtag Lexicon provided
statistically signiﬁcant gain over the baseline. In contra st, coarse aﬀect features and speciﬁcity
features failed to provide the same amount of improvements. This suggests that ﬁne aﬀect categories
contain useful discriminating information not present in c oarse aﬀect categories or simple speciﬁcity
features.
In order to identify which of the 585 emotions had the most dis criminative information, we
calculated information gain of each of 585 emotion features . (Decision tree learners use information
gain to determine the sequence of nodes in the tree.) Table 9 s hows the top ten emotion categories
with the highest gain for the ﬁve personality dimensions. Ob serve that most of the emotions seem
to be reasonable indicators of the corresponding personali ty trait. Note that the columns include
emotions that are indicative of either of the two ends of the p ersonality dimensions (for example, the
emotions in column EXT are associated with either extrovers ion or introversion). Observe also that
some of these emotions are very close to the basic emotions of happiness and sadness, but many are
emotions felt at relatively speciﬁc situations, such as gui lt, excitement, anxiety, and shame.
The emotion categories at the bottom of the information gain lists (not shown here) are either (1)
not relevant for discriminating the target personality dim ension, and/or (2) lacking suﬃcient infor-
mation in the Hashtag Lexicon. For example, we found very few tweets with #petulant, #belittled,
and #genial.
The ﬁve terms most associated with the lexical categories of #possessive and #apart (the two
most discriminative emotion categories for EXT) are shown b elow:
#possessive: possessive: 7.228, hottie: 6.448, tense: 5.911, lover: 5.213, mine: 4.141, . . .
#apart: apart: 4.6, tear: 4.065, miss: 2.341, fall: 2.085, heart: 1.63, . . .
The numbers next to the words are their PMI scores with the emo tion word hashtag. Observe that
the terms in the #possessive category tend to be used more oft en by an extrovert, whereas the terms
in the #apart category tend to be associated more with introv erts.
7.4. Experiments on the Facebook Dataset
7.4.1. Results. Table 10 shows the accuracies obtained on the Facebook datas et. All statistically
signiﬁcant improvements ( p < 0.05) over the majority baseline are marked with a *. All statis tically
signiﬁcant improvements ( p < 0.05) over the Mairesse Baseline are shown in bold. The baselin e
classiﬁer that always predicts the majority class gets 50% a ccuracy on this dataset. Observe that here,
the Mairesse Baseline provided statistically signiﬁcant i mprovements over the majority baseline only
for the EXT, CON, and OPN classes. Once again, unigrams are no t useful. The average information

--- PAGE 17 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 17
Table 9. Essays Dataset: Top ten hashtag emotion categories with hig hest information gain
for personality classiﬁcation.
EXT NEU AGR CON OPN
#possessive #guilt #happy #excited #anxious
#apart #eager #anger #apprehensive #delighted
#happy #interested #homesick #anger #blah
#cherish #keen #giddy #hate #exhausted
#admiring #helpless #chaotic #ashamed #sweet
#impaired #passion #heartbroken #giddy #tired
#jealousy #unhappy #sweet #partial #lonely
#gleeful #insigniﬁcant #neglected #disturbed #nervous
#vibrant #timid #loving #wrecked #ecstatic
#huggy #anticipation #lonely #needed #wrecked
Table 10. Accuracy of automatic classiﬁcation of Facebook status upd ates into the big ﬁve
dimensions of personality. Combination is the system that combines exactly those features that
provide signiﬁcant improvement over the majority classiﬁe r baseline when used individually. The
features combined for the ﬁve dimensions are as follows: for EXT: a + d + e + f; for NEU: c +
e + f; for AGR: d + f; for CON: a + f; and for OPN: a + d + e + f. All stat istically signiﬁcant
improvements (p < . 05) over the Majority Baseline are marked with a *. All statis tically signiﬁcant
improvements (p < . 05) over Mairesse Baseline are shown in bold.
EXT NEU AGR CON OPN
Majority Classiﬁer 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
SVM Classiﬁer
a. Mairesse Baseline (MB) 54.16* 48.72 51.04 53.12* 53.65*
b. Unigrams 49.26 49.90 50.35 49.46 49.59
c. Average Information Content 50.05 54.85* 49.61 50.38 50.27
d. CoarseAﬀ (Osgood Lexicon) 53.16* 49.95 54.35* 49.75 52.97*
e. BasicEmo (NRC Emotion Lexicon) 52.16* 54.34* 50.52 49.92 54.39*
f. FineEmo (Hashtag Emotion Lexicon) 52.00* 53.21* 59.22* 52.12* 53.72*
g. MB + FineEmo 54.53* 48.32 49.22 50.50 53.51*
h. Combination 55.37* 56.63* 58.91* 50.50 53.92*
i. FineEmo-clusters 49.68 51.79 51.96* 59.46* 53.38*
content helps only NEU, whereas the Osgood features improve classiﬁcation of EXT, AGR, and
OPN, and the NRC Emotion Lexicon features improve classiﬁca tion of EXT, NEU, and OPN.
Once again, in contrast to the coarse aﬀect features of Osgoo d and NRC Emotion lexicon,
the ﬁne emotion features of the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon lead to signiﬁcant improvements over
the majority baseline in all ﬁve personality classes. The im provement for AGR is especially large.
Observe also that the Hashtag Lexicon features alone obtain higher results than the collection of
features used in the Mairesse Baseline for all personality d imensions, except EXT and CON (the
improvements are statistically signiﬁcant for NEU and AGR) . Using both the Mairesse Baseline and
the Hashtag lexicon (row g), however, does not lead to better results. Combination (row h) is the
system that combines exactly those features that provide si gniﬁcant improvement over the majority
classiﬁer baseline when used individually. It beats the Mai resse Baseline on NEU and AGR. Results
obtained using the Hashtag Lexicon (row f) are better than th ose obtained using the cluster lexicon
(row i) for EXT, NEU, AGR, and OPN, but interestingly, for CON , using the cluster lexicon is
markedly helpful.

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 Computational Intelligence
Table 11. Facebook Dataset: Top ten hashtag emotion categories with h ighest information
gain for personality classiﬁcation.
EXT NEU AGR CON OPN
#unimportant #happiness #like #calm #tranquil
#attached #bugged #crushed #considerate #lust
#destroyed #alert #mixed #mean #love
#detached #irate #delighted #cowardly #appreciative
#awful #cold #happiness #bewildered #peaceful
#lust #anxious #hopeful #shunned #jealousy
#comfortable #weak #blushing #exposed #innerpeace
#burned #shame #jealousy #imperfect #thoughtful
#troubled #sexy #grateful #judged #touched
#jumpy #desire #spirited #pity #careful
7.4.2. Discussion. In order to identify which of the 585 emotions had the most dis criminative
information on the Facebook dataset, we again calculated in formation gain of each of 585 emotion
features. Table 11 shows the top ten emotion categories with the highest gain for the ﬁve personality
dimensions. Since the dimension of agreeability–disagree ability (AGR) was most helped by the
hashtag lexicon, we list below some of the terms most associa ted with the lexical categories of
#like and #crushed (the two most discriminative emotion categories for AGR):
#like: hash: 3.72, likes: 2.361, word: 1.682, picture: 1.639, wit: 1.58, ice: 1.38, hey: 1.379, twitter:
1.214, tweet: 1.176, cool: 1.097, follow: 1.057, nice: 0.934, song: 0.887, people: 0.873, fun: 0.831, . . .
#crushed: crushed: 3.444, estimated: 3.436, heartbroken: 3.186, devastating: 2.968, hurtful: 2.564,
heartbreaking: 2.353, santa: 2.312, childhood: 2.295, disappointed: 2.076, upsetting: 2.047, goodbye:
2.023, . . .
The numbers next to the words are their PMI scores with the emo tion word hashtag. Observe that
the terms in the #like category tend to be used more often by an agreeable person, whereas the
terms in the #crushed category tend to be associated more wit h those that not as much.
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We compiled a large corpus of tweets, the Hashtag Emotion Cor pus, labeled with hundreds of
ﬁne emotion categories using emotion-word hashtags. Even t hough the corpus has tweets from several
thousand people, we showed that the self-labeled hashtag an notations are consistent. We also showed
how the Hashtag Emotion Corpus can be combined with labeled d ata from a diﬀerent target domain
to improve automatic classiﬁcation accuracy. This experim ent was especially telling since it showed
that self-labeled emotion hashtags correspond well with an notations of trained human judges.
We extracted a large word–emotion association lexicon, the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon, from
the Hashtag Emotion Corpus. This is the ﬁrst lexicon with ass ociation information for hundreds of
emotions. It also has real-valued association score that in dicate the degree of association. We showed
that the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon is of good quality by using t he sentence classiﬁcation task as a
test bed, where classiﬁers using it performed signiﬁcantly better than those that used the manually
created WordNet Aﬀect lexicon.
We performed experiments on personality detection from tex t using the Hashtag Emotion
Lexicon to established a relation between emotions and pers onality. Speciﬁcally, we showed that
lexical categories corresponding to ﬁne-grained emotions such as excitement, guilt, yearning, and
admiration (extracted from the Hashtag Lexicon) are valuab le features in the detection of personality.
We performed experiments using three large automatically c reated lexicons of ﬁne emotion categories,
coarse aﬀect categories, and word information content. The ﬁne emotion category features extracted
form the Hashtag Emotion Lexicon signiﬁcantly improved per formance of all classiﬁers over the
majority baseline, and match or outperform a known set of bas eline features—Mairesse et al. (2007).

--- PAGE 19 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 19
The improvements were in large majority of cases above and be yond those obtained using features
from coarse aﬀect categories and word information content.
Our future work includes collecting emotion-word hashtagg ed tweets in other languages such as
Spanish and Arabic. We also want to collect tweets with hasht ags that are near-synonyms of the
emotion terms described in this paper. We want to determine i f there is a diﬀerence in emotions
associated with diﬀerent morphological forms of the emotio n words, for example, #sad versus
#sadness or #anxious versus #anxiety. There are several applications that can beneﬁt from the
data collected in this paper including early depression det ection, therapeutic beneﬁts of expressing
emotions, tracking public sentiment towards commercial pr oducts, and identifying how people use
emotional expression in microblogs to persuade others. All resources created by the authors and used
in this research eﬀort, including the Hashtag Lexicon, are f reely available.25
REFERENCES
Alm, C. O. and Sproat, R. (2005). Emotional sequencing and de velopment in fairy tales. In
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Aﬀecti ve Computing and Intelligent
Interaction, pages 668–674.
Alm, C. O., Roth, D., and Sproat, R. (2005). Emotions from tex t: Machine learning for text-
based emotion prediction. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on HLT–EMNLP , Vancouver,
Canada.
Aman, S. and Szpakowicz, S. (2007). Identifying expression s of emotion in text. In V. Matouˇ sek
and P. Mautner, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue , volume 4629 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 196–205. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Blitzer, J., Dredze, M., and Pereira, F. (2007). Biographie s, bollywood, boomboxes and blenders:
Domain adaptation for sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pages 187–205, Prague, Czech Republic.
Bollen, J., Mao, H., and Pepe, A. (2011). Modeling Public Moo d and Emotion: Twitter Sentiment
and Socio-Economic Phenomena. In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media , pages 450–453, Barcelona, Spain.
Boucouvalas, A. C. (2002). Real time text-to-emotion engin e for expressive internet communication.
Emerging Communication: Studies on New Technologies and Pr actices in Communication , 5,
305–318.
Bougie, J. R. G., Pieters, R., and Zeelenberg, M. (2003). Ang ry customers don’t come back, they
get back: The experience and behavioral implications of ang er and dissatisfaction in services.
Open access publications from tilburg university, Tilburg University.
Chaﬀar, S. and Inkpen, D. (2011). Using a heterogeneous data set for emotion analysis in text. In
Canadian Conference on AI , pages 62–67.
Chang, C.-C. and Lin, C.-J. (2011). LIBSVM: A Library for Sup port Vector Machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 2, 27:1–27:27.
Cherry, C., Mohammad, S. M., and de Bruijn, B. (2012). Binary classiﬁers and latent sequence
models for emotion detection in suicide notes. Biomedical Informatics Insights , 5, 147–154.
Daum´ e, H. (2007). Frustratingly Easy Domain Adaptation. I n Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , Prague, Czech Republic.
Eisenstein, J., O’Connor, B., Smith, N. A., and Xing, E. P. (2 010). A latent variable model for
geographic lexical variation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 1277–1287, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion , 6(3), 169–200.
Francisco, V. and Gerv´ as, P. (2006). Automated mark up of aﬀective information in english texts. In
P. Sojka, I. Kopecek, and K. Pala, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue , volume 4188 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 375–382. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
25Email Saif Mohammad (saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca).

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 Computational Intelligence
Ganchev, K., Gra¸ ca, J., Blitzer, J., and Taskar, B. (2012). Multi-view learning over structured and
non-identical outputs. CoRR, abs/1206.3256.
Genereux, M. and Evans, R. P. (2006). Distinguishing aﬀecti ve states in weblogs. In AAAI-2006
Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs, pages 27–29, Stanford,
California.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2002). Taking care of the lingui stic features of extraversion. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the Cognitive Science Soci ety, pages 363–368, Sapporo, Japan.
Go, A., Bhayani, R., and Huang, L. (2009). Twitter Sentiment Classiﬁcation using Distant
Supervision. In Final Projects from CS224N for Spring 2008/2009 at The Stanf ord Natural
Language Processing Group .
Gonz´ alez-Ib´ a˜ nez, R., Muresan, S., and Wacholder, N. (2011). Identifying sarcasm in twitter: a
closer look. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association fo r Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 581–586, Portland, Oregon.
Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., and Witten, I. H. (2009). The
WEKA data mining software: an update. SIGKDD Explorations , 11, 10–18.
Hayes, N. and Joseph, S. (2003). Big 5 correlates of three mea sures of subjective well-being.
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences , 34(4), 723–727.
Holzman, L. E. and Pottenger, W. M. (2003). Classiﬁcation of emotions in internet chat: An
application of machine learning using speech phonemes. Tec hnical report, Leigh University.
John, D., Boucouvalas, A. C., and Xu, Z. (2006). Representin g emotional momentum within
expressive internet communication. In Proceedings of the 24th IASTED international conference
on Internet and multimedia systems and applications , pages 183–188, Anaheim, CA. ACTA
Press.
John, O. P. and Srivastava, S. (1999). The big ﬁve taxonomy: H istory, measurement, and theoretical
perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John, editors, Handbook of Personality Theory and
Research, pages 102–138. Guilford Press.
Karypis, G. (2003). CLUTO: A Clustering Toolkit. Technical report, University of Minnesota .
Kim, E., Gilbert, S., Edwards, M. J., and Graeﬀ, E. (2009). De tecting sadness in 140 characters:
Sentiment analysis of mourning Michael Jackson on Twitter. In The Web Ecology project .
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., and Graepel, T. (2013). Privat e traits and attributes are predictable from
digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
Lastovicka, J. L. and Joachimsthaler, E. A. (1988). Improvi ng the detection of personality-behavior
relationships in consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research , 14(4), 583–587.
Litman, D. J. and Forbes-Riley, K. (2004). Predicting stude nt emotions in computer-human tutoring
dialogues. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Co mputational
Linguistics, ACL ’04, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Liu, H., Lieberman, H., and Selker, T. (2003). A model of text ual aﬀect sensing using real-world
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Intelli gent user interfaces , IUI
’03, pages 125–132, New York, NY.
Ma, C., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. (2005). Emotion est imation and reasoning based on aﬀective
textual interaction. In First International Conference on Aﬀective Computing and In telligent
Interaction (ACII-2005) , pages 622–628, Beijing, China.
Mairesse, F., Walker, M. A., Mehl, M. R., and Moore, R. K. (200 7). Using linguistic cues for the
automatic recognition of personality in conversation and t ext. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, 30(1), 457–500.
Matykiewicz, P., Duch, W., and Pestian, J. (2009). Clusteri ng semantic spaces of suicide notes and
newsgroups articles. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural
Language Processing, BioNLP ’09, pages 179–184, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Mihalcea, R. and Liu, H. (2006). A corpus-based approach to ﬁ nding happiness. In AAAI-2006
Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs, pages 139–144. AAAI
Press.
Mohammad, S. M. (2012a). From once upon a time to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in mail
and books. Decision Support Systems , 53(4), 730–741.
Mohammad, S. M. (2012b). Portable features for classifying emotional text. In Proceedings
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa tional Linguistics: Human

--- PAGE 21 ---
Using Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from Twee ts 21
Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2012), Montreal, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mohammad, S. M. and Turney, P. D. (2013). Crowdsourcing a wor d-emotion association lexicon.
Computational Intelligence , 29(3), 436–465.
Mohammad, S. M. and Yang, T. (2011). Tracking Sentiment in Ma il: How Genders Diﬀer on
Emotional Axes. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Approache s to Subjec-
tivity and Sentiment Analysis (WASSA 2.011) , pages 70–79, Portland, Oregon. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Myers, I. B., McCaulley, M. H., and Most, R. (1985). Manual: A guide to the development and use
of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator . Consulting Psychologists Press Palo Alto, CA.
Myers, L. (1962). Manual: The myers-briggs type indicator. Educational Testing Services .
Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. (2009) . Compositionality principle in recognition
of ﬁne-grained emotions from text. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-09) , pages 278–281, San Jose, California.
Osgood, C. E. and Walker, E. G. (1959). Motivation and langua ge behavior: A content analysis of
suicide notes. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 59(1), 58–67.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., and Tannenbaum, P. (1957). The measurement of meaning . University
of Illinois Press.
Pearl, L. and Steyvers, M. (2010). Identifying emotions, in tentions, and attitudes in text using a
game with a purpose. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computationa l
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , Los Angeles, California.
Pennebaker, J. W. and King, L. A. (1999). Linguistic styles: language use as an individual diﬀerence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77(6), 1296–1312.
Pestian, J. P., Matykiewicz, P., and Grupp-Phelan, J. (2008 ). Using natural language processing
to classify suicide notes. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical
Natural Language Processing , BioNLP ’08, pages 96–97, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associatio n
for Computational Linguistics.
Platt, J. (1999). Using analytic QP and sparseness to speed t raining of support vector machines. In
In Neural Info. Processing Systems 11 , pages 557–563. MIT Press.
Plutchik, R. (1962). The Emotions . New York: Random House.
Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolutionary theory o f emotion. Emotion: Theory, research,
and experience , 1(3), 3–33.
Plutchik, R. (1985). On emotion: The chicken-and-egg probl em revisited. Motivation and Emotion ,
9(2), 197–200.
Plutchik, R. (1994). The psychology and biology of emotion . New York: Harper Collins.
Qiu, L., Lin, H., Ramsay, J., and Yang, F. (2012). You are what you tweet: Personality expression
and perception on twitter. Journal of Research in Personality .
Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Turpeinen, M., Laarni, J., Salminen, M., and Kivikangas, M. (2006). Spatial
presence and emotions during video game playing: Does it mat ter with whom you play?
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 15(4), 381–392.
Resnik, P. (1995). Using information content to evaluate se mantic similarity in a taxonomy. In
Proceedings of the 14th international joint conference on A rtiﬁcial intelligence - Volume 1 ,
IJCAI’95, pages 448–453, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kau fmann Publishers Inc.
Strapparava, C. and Mihalcea, R. (2007). Semeval-2007 task 14: Aﬀective text. In Proceedings of
SemEval-2007 , pages 70–74, Prague, Czech Republic.
Strapparava, C. and Valitutti, A. (2004). WordNet-Aﬀect: A n aﬀective extension of WordNet. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Languag e Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2004), pages 1083–1086, Lisbon, Portugal.
Tett, R. P., Jackson, D. N., and Rothstein, M. (1991). Person ality measures as predictors of job
performance: a meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology , 44(4), 703–742.
Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T. O., Sandner, P. G., and Welpe, I. M . (2010). Predicting elections
with twitter : What 140 characters reveal about political se ntiment. Word Journal Of The
International Linguistic Association , pages 178–185.
Turney, P. and Littman, M. L. (2003). Measuring praise and cr iticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 21(4).

--- PAGE 22 ---
22 Computational Intelligence
Vel´ asquez, J. D. (1997). Modeling emotions and other motivations in synthetic agents. In Proceedings
of the fourteenth national conference on artiﬁcial intelli gence and ninth conference on Innovative
applications of artiﬁcial intelligence , AAAI’97/IAAI’97, pages 10–15. AAAI Press.
White, J. K., Hendrick, S. S., and Hendrick, C. (2004). Big ﬁv e personality variables and relationship
constructs. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences , 37(7), 1519–1530.
Yarkoni, T. (2010). Personality in 100,000 words: A large-s cale analysis of personality and word use
among bloggers. Journal of research in personality , 44(3), 363–373.
Zhe, X. and Boucouvalas, A. (2002). Text-to-emotion engine for real time internet communication.
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on CSNDSP , pages 164–168, Staﬀordshire
University.