Saif | Emotion and Sentiment Data 

Home 

Research 
 
 Publications 
 
 Lexicons 
 
 Labeled
 Data 
 
 Invited
 Talks 
 
 Contact 

Emotion,
 Sentiment, and Stance Labeled Data 
 
 This page lists various collections of sentences,
 tweets and documents annotated for categories such as
 sentiment, emotion, stance, and metaphor. Several word-emotion lexicons
 (such as the NRC Emotion Lexicon) and word-sentiment
 lexicons (such as our sentiment composition lexicons)
 are available on this other
 page . If you are a student
 interested in working with me, go
 here . 

Contact: Saif M. Mohammad 
 (saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca) 

Terms
 of use: 

The resources listed here are available free for
 research purposes. Cite the papers associated with the
 resources in your research papers and articles that make
 use of them. (The papers associated with each resource
 are listed below, and also in the individual READMEs.) 

Do not redistribute the data. Direct interested
 parties to this page: 

 http://saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SentimentEmotionLabeledData.html 

National Research Council Canada (NRC) disclaims any
 responsibility for the use of the lexicons listed here
 and does not provide technical support. However, the
 contact listed above will be happy to respond to queries
 and clarifications. 

See full terms of use at the bottom of ths page. 
 
 Emotion, Sentiment, and
 Stance Labeled Data 
 
 Art annotated for emotion, likability, and more 

The WikiArt Emotions Dataset 
 
WikiArt Emotions: An Annotated Dataset of Emotions Evoked by Art. Saif M. Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In  Proceedings of the 11th Edition of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2018) , May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.

 Paper (pdf)      BibTeX        Poster        Project
 
 Page and Data 

Tweets annotated for emotion and sentiment intensity 

SemEval-2018
 Task 1: Affect in Tweets Data : available at the
 webpage for shared task (includes 31 different datasets corresponding to various taks and languages).

Saif M. Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Mohammad
 Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. 2018. Semeval-2018
 Task 1: Affect in tweets. In Proceedings of
 International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
 (SemEval-2018), New Orleans, LA, USA, June 2018. 
 Understanding Emotions: A Dataset of Tweets to Study
 Interactions between Affect Categories. Saif M. Mohammad
 and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings of the 11th
 Edition of the Language Resources and Evaluation
 Conference (LREC-2018), May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.

EmoInt2017
 Data : available at the webpage for shared task on
 detecting emotion intensity at WASSA-2017. (Includes four datasets pertaining to four emotions.)

WASSA-2017
 Shared Task on Emotion Intensity. Saif M.
 Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. In Proceedings
 of the EMNLP 2017 Workshop on Computational
 Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social
 Media (WASSA) , September 2017, Copenhagen,
 Denmark.

 Paper
 (pdf)    BibTex 
     
 Data
 and Shared Task     
 Presentation 
 
 Emotion
 Intensities in Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad and
 Felipe Bravo-Marquez. In Proceedings of the Sixth
 Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
 Semantics (*Sem) , August 2017, Vancouver,
 Canada.

 Paper
 (pdf)     
 BibTex
     
 Data
 and Shared Task      AffectiveTweets
 package     
 Presentation 

Tweets with emotion word hashtags 

#Emotional Tweets , Saif Mohammad, In
 Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on Lexical and
 Computational Semantics (*Sem), June 2012, Montreal,
 Canada. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX

The Hashtag
 Emotion Corpus (aka Twitter Emotion Corpus, or TEC) 
 has tweets with emotion word hashtags. It was used to
 create the NRC Hashtag
 Emotion Lexicon . 

Tweets annotated for sentiment and stance towards
 pre-chosen targets 

Detecting Stance in Tweets And Analyzing its
 Interaction with Sentiment. Parinaz Sobhani,
 Saif M. Mohammad, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings
 of the Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
 Semantics (*Sem) , August 2016, Berlin, Germany. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX     
 Presentation 
    Data
 and Visualization 

Tweets annotated for sentiment, and part of the
 SemEval-2015 share task #10 

Data available at the webpage for SemEval-2015
 shared task #10: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter. 
 
 Developing
 a Successful SemEval Task in Sentiment Analysis of
 Twitter and Other Social Media Texts . Preslav
 Nakov, Sara Rosenthal, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M.
 Mohammad, Zornitsa Kozareva, Alan Ritter, Veselin
 Stoyanov, and Xiaodan Zhu. Language Resources and
 Evaluation. March 2016, Volume 50, Issue 1, pages
 35-65.

 Paper
 (pdf)    Preprint
 Version     BibTeX 
 
 SemEval-2015 Task 10: Sentiment Analysis in
 Twitter . Sara Rosenthal, Preslav Nakov,
 Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M Mohammad, Alan Ritter, and
 Veselin Stoyanov. In Proceedings of the ninth
 international workshop on Semantic Evaluation Exercises
 (SemEval-2015), June 2015, Denver, Colorado.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX 

Electoral/Political tweets annotated for sentiment,
 emotion, purpose and style 

Sentiment,
 Emotion, Purpose, and Style in Electoral Tweets. 
 Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and
 Joel Martin. Information Processing and Management ,
 Volume 51, Issue 4, July 2015, Pages 480499. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX 
     AnnotatedData    
 UnannotatedData 
 
 Semantic Role Labeling of Emotions in Tweets. 
 Saif M. Mohammad, Xiaodan Zhu, and Joel Martin, In
 Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Computational
 Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social Media
 (WASSA), June 2014, Baltimore, MD.

 Paper (pdf)    
 BibTeX 
     AnnotatedData 

Arabic
 BBN blog posts and Syrian tweets 
 translated manaually and automatically into English and
 annotated for sentiment. The original Arabic text is
 also annotated for sentiment. 

BBN blog posts: A subset of 1200 Arabic (Levantine
 dialect) sentences chosen from the BBN
 Arabic-Dialect/English Parallel Text . The
 sentences are extracted social media posts and provided
 with their translation. We manually annotated this
 subset and its translations (both manual and automatic)
 for sentiment (positive, negative, or neutral). 
 
Syrian tweets: dataset of 2000 tweets originating from
 Syria (a country where Levantine dialectal Arabic is
 commonly spoken). These tweets were collected in May
 2014 by polling the Twitter API. This dataset is not
 provided with manual English translation. We manually
 annotated this subset and its translations (both manual
 and automatic) for sentiment (positive, negative, or
 neutral). 
 
 Sentiment
 After Translation: A Case-Study on Arabic Social Media
 Posts . Mohammad Salameh, Saif M Mohammad and
 Svetlana Kiritchenko, In Proceedings of the
 North American Chapter of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2015), June
 2015, Denver, Colorado.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX   
 Data:
 Arabic Sentiment Lexicons 

WordNet sentences annotated for metaphoric vs.
 literal and emotional vs. not emotional impact of verbs. 

Metaphor as a Medium for Emotion: An Empirical
 Study , Saif M. Mohammad, Ekaterina Shutova,
 and Peter Turney. In Proceedings of the Joint
 Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics
 (*Sem) , August 2016, Berlin, Germany. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX  
    Presentation      
 Data
 and Interactive Visualization 

Documents 

Collections 
 of love letters, hate mail, and suicide notes.

 A mapping 
 of directory names in the Enron email corpus to email
 ids and to gender. 

Designated Contact Person: 

Dr. Saif M. Mohammad 

 Senior Research Officer at NRC (and one of the creators of the resource on this page)

 saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 

Terms of Use: 

All rights for the resource(s) listed on this page are held by National Research Council Canada. 

The resources listed here are available free for research purposes. If you make use of them, cite the paper(s) associated with the resource in your research papers and articles. 

If interested in commercial use of any of these resources, send email to the designated contact person. A nominal one-time licensing fee may apply. 

If referenced in news articles and online posts, then cite the resource appropriately. For example: "This application/product/tool makes use of the <resource name>, created by <author(s)> at the National Research Council Canada." If possible, hyperlink the resource name to this page. 

If you use the resource in a product or application, then acknowledge this in the 'About' page and other relevant documentation of the application by stating the name of the resource, the authors, and NRC. For example: "This application/product/tool makes use of the <resource name>, created by <author(s)> at the National Research Council Canada." If possible, hyperlink the resource name to this page. 

Do not redistribute the resource/data. Direct interested parties to this page. They can also email the designated contact person. 

If you create a derivative resource from one of the resources listed on this page:  

Please ask users to cite the source data paper (in addition to your paper).  

Do not distribute the source data. See #6 above. 

Examples of derivative resources include: translations into other languages, added annotations to the text instances, aggregations of multiple datasets, etc. 

If you are interested in uploading our resource on a third-party website or to include the resource in any collection/aggregate of datasets, then: 

Email the designated contact person to begin the process to obtain permission. 

After obtaining permission, any curator of datasets that includes a resource listed here must take steps to ensure that users of the aggregate dataset still cite the papers associated with the individual datasets. This includes at minimum: stating this clearly in the README and providing the citing information of the source dataset. 

By default, no one other than the creators of the resource have permission to upload the resource on a third-party website or to include the resource in any collection/aggregate of datasets. 

National Research Council Canada (NRC) disclaims any responsibility for the use of the resource(s) listed on this page and does not provide technical support. However, the contact listed above will be happy to respond to queries and clarifications. 

If you send us an email, we will be thrilled to know about how you have used the resource. 

Last Updated: March 2016