Saif | Homepage 

Home 

Research 
 
 Publications 
 
 Lexicons 
 
 Labeled

 Data 
 
 Invited

 Talks 
 
 Contact 

Saif M. Mohammad (he/him) 
 
 Principal Research Scientist

 National Research
 Council Canada 

Follow @SaifMMohammad 
 
 Email: saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca, uvgotsaif@gmail.com 

Picture: Palau
 De La Música Catalana (Palace of Catalan Music). Architect: Antoni Gaudi .

A postcard from my first academic conference, ACL-2004 . 

Research Focus: Emotions and Language, Computational Affective Science, Computational Social Science, Sentiment Analysis, Lexical Semantics, Digital Humanities, Natural Language Processing.

BIO 
 Dr. Saif M. Mohammad is an ACL Fellow and a Principal Research
 Scientist at the National

 Research Council Canada (NRC) . He received his Ph.D.
 in Computer Science from the University of
 Toronto . Before joining NRC, Saif was a Research Associate at the Institute of Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Maryland, College Park. His research interests are in Computational

 Linguistics and Natural

 Language Processing (NLP), especially Lexical

 Semantics, Emotions in Language, Computational Affective Science , Sentiment Analysis, Computational Social Science, Fairness in NLP, NLP for Psychology, and Information Visualization. He has published over 150 scientific articles (journal articles, book chapters, and conference papers). He has served in various capacities at prominent journals and conferences, including: action editor for Computational Linguistics and TACL, Associate Editor for Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, senior action editor for ACL Rolling review, chair of the Canada--UK symposium on Ethics in AI, co-chair of SemEval 2017-19 (the largest platform for semantic evaluations), workshops co-chair for ACL 2020, co-organizer of WASSA 2017 and 2018 (a sentiment analysis workshop), and area chair for ACL, NAACL, and EMNLP (in the areas of sentiment analysis, lexical semantics, and fairness in NLP). His team 
 developed a sentiment

 analysis system which ranked first in shared
 task competitions. His word--emotion resources, such as the  NRC
 Emotion Lexicon , are used for analyzing affect in text. His work has garnered media attention, including
 articles in Time , SlashDot,

 LiveScience , io9 , The

 Physics arXiv Blog , PC

 World , and Popular

 Science . 
 
You can watch a video of the talk at the Alan Turing Institute (London, March 2019) summarizing some past work. 

Detailed CV           How my name is pronounced:        Photo 

RECENT NEWS AND PUBLICATIONS 
 
 Recognition 

I was named one of the 2025 ACL Fellows . 

For significant contributions to computational affective science , emotion detection and sentiment analysis, and responsible NLP. 
 
Every year since 2011 the ACL Fellows program recognizes CL and NLP researchers who have made substantial contributions to the field. I am grateful to be included. 

2025-26 Winter Trips 

May 11 to 17: Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
 
Mar 17 to 22: Barcelona, Spain 
 
Dec 8 to 25: Bangalore, Mumbai, India 

Professional Activities 

Conference 
 
Programme Chair for *Sem 2026 . Collocated with ACL 2026. July 2026, San Diego, CA.

 Together with Nedjma Ousidhoum. 
 
 Workshop 
 
 Inaugural Workshop on Computational Affective Science. Christopher Bagdon, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Kristen A. Lindquist, Lyle Ungar, Roman Klinger, and Saif M. Mohammad. LREC 2026, May 2026, Palma De Mallorca, Spain. 
 
 Tutorial 
 
 NLP for Affective Science: Exploring Fundamental Questions on Emotions through Language and Computation. Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla and Saif M. Mohammad. IJCNLP-AACL 2025, Dec 23, 2025, Mumbai, India. 

 Slides 
 
 Best Paper Award Committees 

IJCNLP-AACL 2025, Dec 2025, Mumbai, India. 

 EMNLP 2025, Nov 2025, Suzhou, China. 

 NAACL 2025, Apr-May 2025, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 

Talk s 

Invited talk at the first Valence Asymmetries Conference. An interdisciplinary conference at the intersection of philosophy, linguistics, and cognitive science. Pompeu Fabra University, the Poblenou Campus, Barcelona, Spain. March 19-20, 2026. 
 
Mapping the Emotional and Social Dimensions of Language: The Next Generation of NRC Lexicons. Invited talk at the Preconference Workshop for the Valence Asymmetries Conference. Pompeu Fabra University, the Poblenou Campus, Barcelona, Spain. March 18, 2026.  
 
Computational Affective Science: Using Language and Computation to Shed Light on Fundamental Questions about Affect and Emotion. Quantitative Family Collective. Jan 22, 2026. 

Papers 

Annotating Dimensions of Social Perception in Text: The First Sentence-Level Dataset of Warmth and Competence. Mutaz Ayesh, Saif M. Mohammad, and Nedjma Ousidhoum. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2026), July 2026, San Diego, California.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
DimABSA: Building Multilingual and Multidomain Datasets for Dimensional Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis. Lung-Hao Lee, Liang-Chih Yu, Natalia V Loukachevitch, Ilseyar Alimova, Alexander Panchenko, Tzu-Mi Lin, Zhe-Yu Xu, Jian-Yu Zhou, Guangmin Zheng, Jin Wang, Sharanya Awasthi, Jonas Becker, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2026), July 2026, San Diego, California.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
 Affect, body, cognition, demographics, and emotion: The abcde of text features for computational affective science. Jan Philip Wahle, Gipp Bela Vishnubhotla, Krishnapriya, and Saif M. Mohammad. 2026. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Computational Affective Science (CAS 2026), Palma de Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
Age and affect in language: How emotion expression on social media varies across adulthood. Daniela Teodorescu, Jan Philip Wahle, and Saif M. Mohammad. 2026. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Computational Affective Science (CAS 2026), Palma de Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
 Linguistic Distancing on Social Media: Indicators of Emotion Regulation Across Age Groups. Daniela Teodorescu, Saif M. Mohammad, and Alona Fysche. 2026. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Computational Affective Science (CAS 2026), Palma de Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
From Trial by Fire To Sleep Like a Baby: A Lexicon of Anxiety Associations for 20k English Multiword Expressions. Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 15th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2026), May 2026, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
I Came, I Saw, I Explained: Benchmarking Multimodal LLMs on Figurative Meaning in Memes. Shijia Zhou, Saif M. Mohammad, Barbara Plank, and Diego Frassinelli. In Proceedings of the 15th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2026), May 2026, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 

Journal Articles 

The Shifting Landscape of Vaccine Discourse: Insights From a Decade of Pre- to Post-Covid Vaccine Posts on Social Media. Nikesh Gyawali, Doina Caragea, Cornelia Caragea, and Saif M. Mohammad. PLoS ONE , In the press. 

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
Transforming Scholarly Landscapes: The Influence of Large Language Models on Academic Fields beyond Computer Science Aniket Pramanick, Yufang Hou, Saif M. Mohammad, and Iryna Gurevych. PLoS ONE, In the press.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 

Paper s 

Breaking Bad: Norms for Valence, Arousal, and Dominance for over 10k English Multiword Expressions. Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings  of the  International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing & Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025 (IJCNLP-AACL 2025) , Dec 23, 2025, Mumbai, India.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 
 
 What Media Frames Reveal About Stance: A Dataset and Study about Memes in Climate Change Discourse. 

 Shijia Zhou, Siyao Peng, Simon M. Luebke, Jörg Haßler, Mario Haim, Saif M. Mohammad, Barbara Plank. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2025 Findings, Dec 2025, Shujou, China.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 

The Language of Interoception: Examining Embodiment and Emotion Through a Corpus of Body Part Mentions. 

 Sophie Wu, Jan Philip Wahle, Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2025 Finding, Dec 2025, Shujou, China.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 

2025 Summer Trips 

July 24 to August 2: Bamberg, Germany; Linz, Austria; Vienna, Austria 
 
June 28 to July 8: Vancouver and Victoria, BC 

Talk s 

A Tutorial on NLP for Affective Science: Exploring Fundamental Questions on Emotions through Language and Computation. Linz NLP Summer School, July 2025. Linz, Vienna.

 Slides 
 
NLP for Affective Science: Exploring Fundamental Questions on Emotions through Language and Computation. University of Bamberg, July 2025. Bamberg, Germany.

 Slides     Video 

Paper s 

BRIGHTER: BRIdging the Gap in Human-Annotated Textual Emotion Recognition Datasets for 28 Languages. Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Nedjma Ousidhoum, Idris Abdulmumin, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Meriem Beloucif, et al. and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2025), July 2025, Vienna, Austria. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Slides    Project Webpage 
 
 ACL 2025 Best Paper Award (best resource paper category) 
 
 Words of Warmth: Trust and Sociability Norms for over 26k English Words. Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2025), July 2025, Vienna, Austria. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX    Slides     Project Page 
 
 Building Better: Avoiding Pitfalls in Developing Language Resources when Data is Scarce. Nedjma Ousidhoum, Meriem Beloucif, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2025), July 2025, Vienna, Austria. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Slides 
 
 Affect, Body, Cognition, Demographics, and Emotion: The ABCDE of Text Features for Computational Affective Science. Jan Philip Wahle, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Bela Gipp, Saif M. Mohammad, Arxiv.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 
 
 The Nature of NLP: Analyzing Contributions in NLP Papers. Aniket Pramanick, Yufang Hou, Saif M. Mohammad, and Iryna Gurevych. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2025), July 2025, Vienna, Austria. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Project Page (code and data) 
 
 SemEval-2025 Task 11: Bridging the Gap in Text-Based Emotion Detection. Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Nedjma Ousidhoum, Idris Abdulmumin, Seid Muhie Yimam, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Meriem Beloucif, Christine De Kock, Tadesse Destaw Belay, Ibrahim Said Ahmad, Nirmal Surange, Daniela Teodorescu, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Alham Fikri Aji, Felermino Ali, Vladimir Araujo, Abinew Ali Ayele, Oana Ignat, Alexander Panchenko, Yi Zhou, Saif M. Mohammad.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Slides    Project Webpage 
 
SemEval 2025 Best Shared Task Award. 
 
Cited by CodaBench's annual newsletter for being the most popular task on the CodaBench platform in 2024 . 
 
 Citation Amnesia: On The Recency Bias of NLP and Other Academic Fields. Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Mohamed Abdalla, Bela Gipp, Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of The 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING  2025) , January 2025, Abu Dhabi, UAE.  

 Paper (pdf)      BibTeX        Code        Poster        Demo 

Journal Paper 

Using Natural Language Processing to Analyse Text Data in Behavioural Science . Stefan Feuerriegel, Abdurahman Maarouf, Dominik Bär, Dominique Geissler, Jonas Schweisthal, Nicolas Pröllochs, Claire E. Robertson, Steve Rathje4, Jochen Hartmann, Saif M. Mohammad, Oded Netzer, Alexandra A. Siegel, Barbara Plank, and Jay J. Van Bavel. Nature Reviews Psychology. 2025. 
 
 Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying 

 and extrapolating the capabilities of language models . Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2024.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX   
 
 One of five finalists for 2024's Outstanding Certification at TMLR. 

2024 Fall Trips 

Nov 24 to Dec 1: Munich Germany 
 
Nov 11 to Nov 17: Miami, FL (EMNLP 2024) 
 
Sep 30 to Oct 3: Montreal, Canada 

Talk s 

NLP for Affective Science: A Window into Emotions through Language and Computation? LMU Seminar. November 2024. Munich, Germany. 
 
 NLP for Affective Science. What are the big questions? And how do we get there? Workshop on NLP in the era of generative AI, cognitive sciences, and societal transformation . October 2024. MILA, Montreal, Canada.

 Slides 

Paper s 

WorryWords: Norms of Anxiety Association for 44,450 English Words. Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2024 , Main) , November 2024, Miami, FL.  

 Paper (pdf)      BibTeX      Video      Poster      ProjectPage & Data 
 
 Emotion Granularity from Text: An Aggregate-Level Indicator of Mental Health. Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Daniela Teodorescu, Mallory J. Feldman, Kristen A. Lindquist, and Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2024 , Main) , November 2024, Miami, FL.

 Paper (pdf)      BibTeX      Video      Poster      ProjectPage & Data 

Journal Paper 

EmoAtlas: An emotional network analyser of texts merging psychological lexicons, artificial intelligence and network science. Alfonso Semeraro, Salvatore Vilella, Riccardo Improta, Edoardo Sebastiano De Duro, Saif M. Mohammad, Giancarlo Ruffo, and Massimo Stella. To appear in Behavior Research Methods, 2024. 

2024 Summer Trips 

June 15 to 22: Mexico City, Mexico (NAACL 2024) 
 
July 10 to 22: San Fransisco, CA 
 
August 4 to 10: Bengaluru, India 
 
August 11 to 20: Bangkok, Thailand (ACL 2024)

Students and Researchers feel free to reach out if you are in any of these places at these dates. Always happy to connect. 

Paper s 

The Emotion Dynamics of Literary Novels. Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Adam Hammond, Graeme Hirst, Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2024), Bangkok, Thailand. 

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 
 
SemRel2024: A Collection of Semantic Textual Relatedness Datasets for 13 Languages. Nedjma Ousidhoum, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Mohamed Abdalla, Idris Abdulmumin, Ibrahim Said Ahmad, Sanchit Ahuja, Alham Fikri Aji, Vladimir Araujo, Abinew Ali Ayele, Pavan Baswani, Meriem Beloucif, Chris Biemann, Sofia Bourhim, Christine De Kock, Genet Shanko Dekebo, Oumaima Hourrane, Gopichand Kanumolu, Lokesh Madasu, Samuel Rutunda, Manish Shrivastava, Thamar Solorio, Nirmal Surange, Hailegnaw Getaneh Tilaye, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Genta Winata, Seid Muhie Yimam, Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2024), Bangkok, Thailand. 

Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 
 
 SemEval Task 1: Semantic Textual Relatedness for African and Asian Languages. Nedjma Ousidhoum, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Mohamed Abdalla, Idris Abdulmumin, Ibrahim Said Ahmad, Sanchit Ahuja, Alham Fikri Aji, Vladimir Araujo, Meriem Beloucif, Christine De Kock, Oumaima Hourrane, Manish Shrivastava, Thamar Solorio, Nirmal Surange, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Seid Muhie Yimam, Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of SemEval-2024. Mexico City, Mexico. Best Task Description Paper - Honorable Mention. 

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides    Project Page 

Talk 

We are Who We Cite: Bridges of Influence Between Natural Language Processing and Other Academic Fields. Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Nov 18, 2023. 

2023 Last Quarter Trips 

Nov 14 - 22, 2023: Munich, Germany 
 
Dec 5 - 14, 2023: Singapore

 Dec 15, 2023: New York, USA 
 
Dec 30, 2023 - Jan 2, 2024: Dubai, UAE

 Jan 3 - 19, 2024: Bangalore, India

 Jan 20 - 22, 2024: Dubai, UAE 

Paper s 

We are Who We Cite: Bridges of Influence Between Natural Language Processing and Other Academic Fields. Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Mohamed Abdalla, Bela Gipp, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2023 , Main) , December 2023, Singapore.  
 
 A Diachronic Analysis of Paradigm Shifts in NLP Research: When, How, and Why? Aniket Pramanick, Yufang Hou, Saif M. Mohammad, Iryna Gurevych. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2023 , Main) , December 2023, Singapore.  
 
 AfriSenti: A Twitter Sentiment Analysis Benchmark for African Languages. Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Idris Abdulmumin, Abinew Ali Ayele, Nedjma Ousidhoum, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Seid Muhie Yimam, Ibrahim Sa'id Ahmad, Meriem Beloucif, Saif M. Mohammad, Sebastian Ruder, Oumaima Hourrane, Pavel Brazdil, Felermino Dário Mário António Ali, Davis Davis, Salomey Osei, Bello Shehu Bello, Falalu Ibrahim, Tajuddeen Gwadabe, Samuel Rutunda, Tadesse Belay, Wendimu Baye Messelle, Hailu Beshada Balcha, Sisay Adugna Chala, Hagos Tesfahun Gebremichael, Bernard Opoku, Steven Arthur. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2023 , Main) , December 2023, Singapore.  
 
 Language and Mental Health: Measures of Emotion Dynamics from Text as Linguistic Biosocial Markers. Daniela Teodorescu, Tiffany Cheng, Alona Fyshe, and Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2023 , Main) , December 2023, Singapore.  
 
 Evaluating Emotion Arcs Across Languages: Bridging the Global Divide in Sentiment Analysis . Daniela Teodorescu and Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2023 , Findings) , December 2023, Singapore. (Talk at Pan-DL) 
 
 Forgotten Knowledge: Examining the Citational Amnesia in NLP. Janvijay Singh, Mukund Rungta, Diyi Yang, and Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2023) , Toronto, Canada. Best Paper - Honorable Mention. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX    Slides     Blog Post 
 
 The Elephant in the Room: Analyzing the Presence of Big Tech in Natural Language Processing Research. Mohamed Abdalla, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Aurélie Névéol, Fanny Ducel, Saif M. Mohammad, and Karen Fort. In  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2023) , Toronto, Canada.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX    Slides 
 
SemEval-2023 Task 12: Sentiment Analysis for African Languages (AfriSenti-SemEval). Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Idris Abdulmumin, Seid Muhie Yimam, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Ibrahim Sa'id Ahmad, Nedjma Ousidhoum, Abinew Ayele, Saif M. Mohammad, Meriem Beloucif, Sebastian Ruder. SemEval 2023, Toronto, Canada. 
 
 AfriSenti SemEval-2023 Shared Task 
 
 AfriSenti: A Twitter Sentiment Analysis Benchmark for African Languages. Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Idris Abdulmumin, Abinew Ali Ayele, Nedjma Ousidhoum, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Seid Muhie Yimam, Ibrahim Sa'id Ahmad, Meriem Beloucif, Saif Mohammad, Sebastian Ruder, Oumaima Hourrane, Pavel Brazdil, Felermino Dário Mário António Ali, Davis Davis, Salomey Osei, Bello Shehu Bello, Falalu Ibrahim, Tajuddeen Gwadabe, Samuel Rutunda, Tadesse Belay, Wendimu Baye Messelle, Hailu Beshada Balcha, Sisay Adugna Chala, Hagos Tesfahun Gebremichael, Bernard Opoku, Steven Arthur. Africa-NLP, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda. Best Paper Award. 
 
 AI Usage Cards: Responsibly Reporting AI-generated Content. Jan Philip Wahle , Terry Ruas, Saif M. Mohammad, Norman Meuschke, and Bela Gipp. arXiv:2303.03886 , 2023.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX    Slides 
 
 What Makes Sentences Semantically Related? A Textual Relatedness Dataset and Empirical Study. Mohamed Abdalla, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, and Saif M. Mohammad. EACL, 2023, Dubrovnik, Croatia.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 
 
Best Practices in the Creation and Use of Emotion Lexicons. Saif M. Mohammad. EACL, 2023, Dubrovnik, Croatia.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX    Slides 

Trip s 

Toronto, Canada. October 28-30, 2022. 
 
Ghent, Belgiun. November 30 - December 2, 2022. 
 
Abu Dhabi, UAE. December 3-12, 2022. 
 
Göttingen, Germany. December 13-15, 2022. 

Paper s 

Geographic Citation Gaps in NLP Research. Mukund Rungta, Janvijay Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Diyi Yang. EMNLP, 2022, Abu Dhabi, UAE.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 
 
 Frustratingly Easy Sentiment Analysis of Text Streams: Generating High-Quality Emotion Arcs Using Emotion Lexicons. Daniela Teodorescu and Saif Mohammad. arXiv: 2210.07381 .  Oct 2021.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX    Slides 

Invited Talk s 

The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, May 8, 2023. 
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. University of Gottingen, Dec 14, 2022. 
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Keynote talk at the Emotion Workshop, University of Ghent, Dec 1, 2022. 
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. The Statistical Society of Canada (SSC), Webinar, Sep 4, 2022. 

Paper s 

Voices Speaking To and About One Another: Introducing the Project Dialogism Novel Corpus. Adam Hammond, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Graeme Hirst, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2022 Conference , July 2022, virtual.

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX 

Tweet Emotion Dynamics: Emotion Word Usage in Tweets from US and Canada. Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 13th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2022), May 2022, Marseille, France.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Project Home Page (Code and Data)     Poster     Slides 
 
D3: A Massive Dataset of Scholarly Metadata for Analyzing the State of Computer Science Research. Jan Philip Wahle , Terry Ruas, Saif Mohammad and Bela Gipp. In Proceedings of the 13th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2022), May 2022, Marseille, France.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX      Project Home Page (Code and Data)   Slides 

Invited Talks 

Ethics Sheets for Social NLP Tasks. The 10th Social NLP Workshop at ACL 2022 , Seattle, USA. July 14, 2022. 
 
Tweet Emotion Dynamics. (Talk by Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla). The Alan Turing Institute . July 28, 2022. London, UK. 
 
Ethics Sheets for Social AI Tasks. The Alan Turing Institute . July 28, 2022. London, UK. 
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Defence Research and Development Canada, Toronto Research Centre, April 21, 2022, Toronto, Canada.

 Slides 
 
The Search for Emotions in Language. Carolina Affective Science Lab. University of North Carolina. Feb 21, 2022.

 Slides       
 
Emotions in Text: The Power and Versatility of Large Emotion Lexicons. Canadian Digital Services. January 13, 2022.   
 
Judging AI: How to Develop a Healthy Mistrust of AI. The Canadian Appellate Courts Seminar , Halifax, Canada. Nov 25, 2021.

 Slides 

Journal Paper 

Ethics Sheet for Automatic Emotion Recognition and Sentiment Analysis.  Saif M. Mohammad. Computational Linguistics, 48(2):239-278 .  June 2022.

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Slides     Poster 

Papers 

Ethics Sheets for AI Tasks . Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2022) , May 2022, Dublin, Ireland. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Slides     Poster 
 
 What Makes Sentences Semantically Related: A Textual Relatedness Dataset and Empirical Study . Mohamed Abdalla, Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla, Saif Mohammad. arXiv: 2110.04845 .  Oct 2021. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Data and Code 

Blog Posts 

Ethics Sheets for AI Tasks. July 5, 2021.     

 Video 
 
 Ethics Sheet for Automatic Emotion Recognition and Sentiment Analysis. July 5, 2021. 

Invited Talks 

Ethics Sheets for AI Tasks and a Case Study for Automatic Emotion Recognition. The University of British Columbia  Language Sciences Talks , Vancouver, Canada. July 15, 2021.

 Slides       Video 
 
Emotion Dynamics of Fictional Characters using Large Emotion Lexicons. The 17th IGEL Conference. June 23, 2021.

 Slides       
 
Ethics Sheets for AI Tasks and a Case Study for Automatic Emotion Recognition. The Alan Turing Institute , London, UK. May, 2021. 

Paper 

Ruddit: Norms of Offensiveness for English Reddit Comments. Rishav Hada, Sohi Sudhir, Pushkar Mishra, Helen Yannakoudakis, Saif M. Mohammad, and Ekaterina Shutova. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2021), August 2021. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Code and Data 

Journal Paper s 

Emotion Dynamics in Movie Dialogues. Will E. Hipson and Saif M. Mohammad. PLoS ONE 16(9): e0256153 , September, 2021.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Code 
 
 Examining the Language of Solitude vs. Loneliness in Tweets .  Will E. Hipson, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Robert J. Coplan, Saif M. Mohammad. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. March 2021. 

 Paper (pdf)    BibTeX 

Book Chapter 

Sentiment Analysis: Automatically Detecting Valence, Emotions, and Other Affectual States from Text. Saif M. Mohammad, Emotion Measurement (Second Edition), Elsevier , 2021.

 PDF (arxiv preprint arXiv:2005.11882 )      BibTeX 

Talk 

What is a Research Ethics Statement and Why does it Matter? Saif M. Mohammad.

 Slides

I presented some of these ideas at the  EMNLP 2020 Plenary Panel on Publishing in the Era of Responsible AI: How Can we be Proactive? Considerations and Implications. Panelists: Emily M. Bender, Rosie Campbell, Allan Dafoe, Pascale Fung, Meg Mitchell, Saif M. Mohammad. 

Paper 

Practical and Ethical Considerations in the Effective use of Emotion and Sentiment Lexicons.  Saif M. Mohammad. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03492. December 2020. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX 

Recognition 

Nominated for the outstanding acheivement in research excellence award by National Research Council Canada. November 2020. (1 of 6 nominees) 

Invited Talk 

Gender Gap in Natural Language Processing Research: Disparities in Authorship and Citations. Women+@DCS Seminar Series, University of Sheffield , October 28 2020, Sheffield, UK.

 Slides       Video 

Papers 

Lexichrome: Text Construction and Lexical Discovery with Word-Color Associations Using Interactive Visualization . Chris K. Kim, Uta Hinrichs, and Saif M. Mohammad, and Chris Collins. In Proceedings of DIS 2020: Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , July 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Video     Interactive Visualization 
 
 Examining Citations of Natural Language Processing Literature.  Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2020) , July 2020, Seattle, USA. 

Examines nine questions pertaining to broad trends in citations of NLP papers (across time, across venue types, across paper types, across areas, etc.). 

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Presentation        Project Home Page     Interactive Visualizations       Medium Blog Posts 
 
 Gender Gap in Natural Language Processing Research: Disparities in Authorship and Citations. Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2020). July 2020. Seattle, USA.  

Summary: Examines eight questions pertaining to disparities across male and female NLP researchers (in authorship and citations). 

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Video       Presentation        Project Home Page       Medium Blog Posts 
 
 PoKi: A Large Dataset of Poems by Children. Will E. Hipson, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2020), May 2020, Marseille, France.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Project Home Page and Data 
 
 NLP Scholar: An Interactive Visual Explorer for Natural Language Processing Literature.  Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2020) , July 2020, Seattle, USA. 

Presents an interactive visualization tool to help users find (related) work published in the ACL Anthology. 

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Presentation       Project Home Page     Interactive Visualizations       Medium Blog Posts 
 
 SOLO: A Corpus of Tweets for Examining the State of Being Alone. Svetlana Kiritchenko, Will Hipson, Robert Coplan, and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2020), May 2020, Marseille, France.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Data 
 
 WordWars: A Dataset to Examine the Natural Selection of Words. Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2020), May 2020, Marseille, France.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Data       Project Home Page and Visualizations 
 
 NLP Scholar: A Dataset for Examining the State of NLP Research. Saif M. Mohammad. In  Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2020) , May 2020, Marseille, France. 

Presents the NLP Scholar Dataset -- a single unified source of information from both the ACL Anthology (AA) and Google Scholar for tens of thousands of NLP papers.Presents initial work on analyzing the volume of  research in NLP over the years, identifies some the most cited papers in AA, as well as outlines a list of potential applications of the dataset. 

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Project Home Page and Data     Interactive Visualizations       Medium Blog Posts 
 
 The State of NLP Literature: A Diachronic Analysis of the ACL Anthology.  Saif M. Mohammad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03562. November 2019.  

A manuscript that brings together the analyses of NLP papers first presented in the four State of NLP blog posts. 

Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       Project Home Page and Data       Interactive Visualizations       Medium Blog Posts 

Applied AI Ethics. Report on Canada-United Kingdom Symposia on Ethics in AI in Ottawa, Canada and London, UK. de Bruijn, B., Désillets, A., Fraser, K., Kiritchenko, S., Mohammad, S., Vinson, N., Bloomfield, P., Brace, H., Brzoska, K., Elhalal, A., Ho, K., Kinsey, L., McWhirter, R., Nazare, M., and Ofuri-Kuragu, E. Digital Catapult, London, UK / NRC, Ottawa, Canada, 2019. 

 Paper (pdf)     Symposium Website 

Recognition 

Awarded a "Top Writer for Science on Medium" status. November 2019. (One of 50 writers who had this tag at the time. There were about 63K stories in the Science category on Medium at the time.) 

Invited Talk s 

The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Data Systems Seminar Series, University of Waterloo , October 28 2019, Waterloo, Canada.

 Slides     Video 
 
Fairness and Emotions in Language. The Globe and Mail. October 29, 2019, Toronto, Canada. 
 
Hosting the Responsible AI Summit , October 24 2019, Montreal, Canada. 
 
Creativity and Emotions in Language. Invited talk and panel on AI and Creativity in Government at the Creative Marketplace Lab on Data, Skills and Technology, Department of  Canadian   Heritage , September 30 2019, Gatineau, Canada. 
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Mila - Quebec AI Institute , August 2019, Montreal, Canada.

 Slides   
 
The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Keynote speech at the 8th KDD Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining (WISDOM-2019), August 2019, Anchorage, Alaska.

 Slides    

Web/Press Mentions 

Gender and Racial Bias in Cloud NLP Sentiment APIs , Aug 21, 2019. Article looking into race and gender biases in the Google and AWS cloud sentiment analysis APIs using  the Equity Evaluation Corpus and the techniques we published in 2018 . 

Journal Paper 

AffectiveTweets: a Weka Package for Analyzing Affect in Tweets. Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Eibe Frank, Bernhard Pfahringer, Saif M. Mohammad. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(92):1−6, 2019.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Code 

Papers 

Big Bird: A Large, Fine-Grained, Bigram Relatedness Dataset for Examining Semantic Composition . Shima Asaadi, Saif M. Mohammad, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2019),  June 2019, Minnesota, USA.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Poster        Data        Project Home Page and Visualizations         Code 
 
 How do we feel when a robot dies? Emotions expressed on Twitter before and after hitchBOT’s destruction. Kathleen C. Fraser, Frauke Zeller, David Harris Smith, Saif M. Mohammad, and Frank Rudicz. In Proceedings of the NAACL workshop on computational approaches to subjectivity, sentiment, and social media analysis (WASSA-19), June 2019, Minneapolis, USA.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Slides        Visualizations 

Invited Talk s 

Examining Fairness in Language Through Emotions . Keynote speech at the 2019 Canada--UK Workshop on Practical AI Ethics , March 12, 2019, London, UK.

 Slides 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language . The Alan Turing Institute . March 11, 2019. London, UK.

 Slides     Video 
 
 Examining Fairness in Language Through Emotions . The 2019 Canada--UK Symposium on Ethics in AI , Feb 21, 2019, Ottawa, Canada.

 Slides     Video 

Journal Paper 

The Natural Selection of Words: Finding the Features of Fitness. Peter D. Turney and Saif M. Mohammad. PLoS One, 14 (1):e0211512. January 2019.

 Paper
 (pdf)      BibTeX      Code 

Professional Community Involvement 

Chair of the 2019 Canada--UK Symposium on Ethics in AI , Feb 21--22, Ottawa, Canada. 
 
Area chair for Sentiment Analysis and Argumentation Mining, EMNLP-IJCNLP-2019 , Hong Kong. 
 
Area Chair for ACL 2019 in the area of Sentiment Analysis and Argument Mining. 
 
Area chair for Semantics in NLP Applications, *Sem-2019 , Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. 
 
Area Chair for Ethics, Bias and Fairness at NAACL-2019 , Minneapolis, USA. 
 
 NAACL-2019 has a special theme encouraging papers on ethics, bias, and airness. 
 
Co-chair of SemEval 2019 , Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. 
 
Mentor, Student Research Workshop, ACL-2019 , Florence, Italy 
 
Mentor, Student Research Workshop, NAACL-2019 , Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. 

Invited Talks 

The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language . Venue: Keynote speech at the 6th evaluation campaign  EVALITA 2018 . December 12, 2018. Turin, Italy. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Venue: Department of Computational Linguistics, Heidelberg University. December 13, 2018. Heidelberg, Germany. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Venue: Invited Speaker Series. Pickering Centre for Human Development, Carleton University . November 16, 2018. Ottawa, Canada. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Short talk to 9th graders on the occasion of Bring-Your-Ninth-Grader-to-Work Day at the National Research Council Canada. November 14, 2018. Ottawa, Canada 

The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language . At the Natural Language Processing Seminar and AI Seminar, University of Michigan , Ann Arbor. October 2, 2018. Ann Arbor, Michigan. 

Journal Paper 

Data and systems for medication-related text classification and concept normalization from Twitter: Insights from the Social Media Mining for Health (SMM4H)-2017 shared task. Abeed Sarker, Maksim Belusov, Jasper Friedrichs, Kai Hakala, Sifei Han, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Farrokh Mehryary, Anthony Rios, Tung Tran, Berry de Bruijn, Filip Ginter, Ramakanth Kavuluru, Debanjan Mahata, Saif M. Mohammad, Goran Nenadic, Graciela Gonzalez-Hernandez. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA), 25(10):1274--1283, October 2018 .

Official Rankings : Our team (NRC-Canada) ranked first in the AMIA
 
 Shared Task on detecting adverse drug reactions in
 tweets. 

Invited Talks 

The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Department of Computer Science, University of Utah. August 6, 2018. Salt Lake City, Utah. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Keynote speech at the ACL Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media. July 20, 2018. Melbourne, Australia. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. Department of Computer Science, University of Melbourne, July 20, 2018. Melbourne, Australia. 
 
 The Search for Emotions, Creativity, and Fairness in Language. The University of Waikato, Computing & Mathematical Sciences . July 10, 2018. Hamilton, New Zealand. 
 
 Examining Gender and Race Bias in Two Hundred Sentiment Analysis Systems. Invited talk at the Second ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing , New Orleans, LA, USA, June 2018. 
 
 The Search for
 Emotions in Language. Google
 
 Research. May 25, 2018. Montreal, Canada. 

Professional Community Involvement 

Co-organizer of the 9th Workshop
 
 on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity,
 Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, to be held in
 conjunction with EMNLP-2018, Oct 31–Nov 1, Brussels,
 Belgium. 

Papers 
 Obtaining Reliable Human Ratings of Valence,
 Arousal, and Dominance for 20,000 English Words. Saif M.
 Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
 Melbourne, Australia, July 2018.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Project Page and Data      Presentation      Video      Poster 
 
Examining Gender and Race Bias in Two Hundred Sentiment
 Analysis Systems. Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M.
 Mohammad. In Proceedings of *Sem , New Orleans,
 LA, USA, June 2018.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)    
 
 BibTeX    Project
 
 Page and Data      Presentation 
 
Agree or Disagree: Predicting Judgments on Nuanced
 Assertions. Michael Wojatzki, Torsten
 Zesch, Saif M. Mohammad, and  Svetlana
 Kiritchenko. In Proceedings of *Sem , New
 Orleans, LA, USA, June 2018.

 Paper (pdf)    
 
 BibTeX        Project
 
 Page and Data        Presentation 
 
 Semeval-2018 Task 1: Affect in tweets. Saif M.
 Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Mohammad Salameh, and
 Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings of
 International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
 (SemEval-2018) , New Orleans, LA, USA, June 2018.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX       
 
 Data and Visualization      Presentation 

SemEval-2018 Task 1: Affect in Tweets Webpage 

 75 teams and about 200 participants. 
 
DeepMiner at SemEval-2018 Task 1: Emotion Intensity
 Recognition Using Deep Representation Learning. Habibeh
 Naderi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M. Mohammad, and Stan
 Matwin. In Proceedings of International Workshop on
 Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2018) , New Orleans,
 LA, USA, June 2018.

 Paper (pdf)    
 
 BibTeX   
 
WikiArt Emotions: An Annotated Dataset of Emotions
 Evoked by Art. Saif M. Mohammad and Svetlana
 Kiritchenko. In  Proceedings of
 the 11th Edition of the Language Resources and
 Evaluation Conference (LREC-2018) , May 2018,
 Miyazaki, Japan.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX        Poster        Project
 
 Page and Data 
 
Word Affect Intensities. Saif M. Mohammad.
 In  Proceedings of the 11th Edition of the
 Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
 (LREC-2018) , May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX        Presentation        Project Page and
 Data 

Understanding Emotions: A Dataset of Tweets to Study
 Interactions between Affect Categories. Saif M.
 Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In  Proceedings
 
 of the 11th Edition of the Language Resources and
 Evaluation Conference (LREC-2018) , May 2018,
 Miyazaki, Japan. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX        Presentation        Shared
 
 Task Page and Data 
 
Quantifying Qualitative Data for Understanding
 Controversial Issues. Michael Wojatzki, Saif M.
 Mohammad, Torsten Zesch, and Svetlana Kiritchenko.
 In  Proceedings of the 11th Edition of the
 Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
 (LREC-2018) , May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX         Presentation       Project
 
 Page and Data 

Invited Talks 

The
 
 Search for Emotions in Language. Featured speaker
 at the Distinguished Computational Linguistics Lecture
 at Rochester Institute of Technology. March 1, 2018.
 Rochester, NY, USA. 
 
 The
 
 Search for Emotions in Language. University of
 Toronto. Feb 27, 2018. Toronto, Canada. 
 
 Finding
 Emotions in Language. Information Systems Sprott
 School of Business, Carleton University. November 13,
 2017. Ottawa, Canada. 
 
 Emotion-Aware
 
 Machines. Short talk to 9th graders on the
 occasion of Bring-Your-Ninth-Grader-to-Work Day at the
 National Research Council Canada. November 1, 2017.
 Ottawa, Canada. 

Professional Community Involvement 

Co-chair for SemEval-2018 . 
 
Organizer of SemEval-2018
 
 Task 1: Affect in Tweets . 

 75 teams and about 200 participants. 

Papers 

NRC-Canada at SMM4H Shared Task: Classifying Tweets
 Mentioning Adverse Drug Reactions and Medication Intake.
 Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M. Mohammad, Jason Morin, and
 Berry de Bruijn (2017). In Proceedings of the
 Social Media Mining for Health Applications Workshop
 at AMIA-2017 , Washington, DC, USA, 2017.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Our System Homepage 

Official Rankings : Our team (NRC-Canada) ranked first in the AMIA
 
 Shared Task on detecting adverse drug reactions in
 tweets.   

WASSA-2017 Shared
 Task on Emotion Intensity. Saif M. Mohammad and
 Felipe Bravo-Marquez. In Proceedings of the EMNLP
 2017 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
 Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social Media (WASSA) ,
 September 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTex      Data
 
 and Shared Task     
 
 Presentation 
 
 Emotion
 
 Intensities in Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe
 Bravo-Marquez. In Proceedings of the Sixth Joint
 Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics
 (*Sem) , August 2017, Vancouver, Canada.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTex      Data
 
 and Shared Task      AffcetiveTweets package      Presentation 
 
 Best-Worst
 Scaling More Reliable than Rating Scales: A Case Study
 on Sentiment Intensity Annotation. Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M.
 Mohammad. In Proceedings of the Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics (ACL-2017) , Vancouver, Canada, 2017.

 Paper (pdf)    
 
 BibTeX      
 Data       Poster       

Invited Talks 

Affect
 
 Associations in Creative Language. Seminar Series
 for the Doctorate in Cognitive Informatics at Université
 du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), April 13, 2017, Montreal,
 Canada.

 Presentation 
 
 Affect
 Associations in Creative Language. Keynote speech at the
 COLING 2016 workshop on Computational
 
 Modeling of People's Opinions, Personality, and
 Emotions in Social Media (PEOPLES 2016) , December
 12, 2016, Osaka, Japan.

 Presentation 
 
 Affect
 
 Associations: The Building Blocks of Sentiment
 Analysis. Keynote
 speech at the 20th
 International Conference on Asian Language Processing
 (IALP 2016) , November 21-23, 2016, National Cheng
 Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

 Presentation 
 
 Affect
 Associations in Creative Language. Keynote speech at the 2016
 IR Workshop at the Academia Sinica, November 24, 2016,
 Taipei, Taiwan.

 Presentation 
 
Emotion-Aware Machines. Short talk to
 9th graders on the occasion of
 Bring-Your-Ninth-Grader-to-Work Day at the National
 Research Council Canada. November 1, 2016. Ottawa,
 Canada. 
 
Capturing Reliable Fine-Grained
 Sentiment Associations by Crowdsourcing and Best–Worst
 Scaling. Invited talk at the TAMALE seminar
 series , September 15, 2016, University of Ottawa.
 (Joint work with, and talk given by, Svetlana
 Kiritchenko.)

 Presentation 
 
Metaphor as a Medium for Emotion: An
 Empirical Study. Invited talk at the TAMALE seminar
 series , September 15, 2016, University of Ottawa.
 (Joint work with Ekaterina Shutova and Peter Turney.)

 Presentation 

Professional Community Involvement 

Co-chair for SemEval-2017 . 
 
Co-organizer of the 8th Workshop on
 Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment
 & Social Media Analysis (WASSA-2017) , to be
 held in conjunction with EMNLP-2017, Copenhagen,
 Denmark. 
 
Organizer of shared
 
 task on detecting emotion intensity at WASSA-2017. 
 
Area chair for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining at ACL-2017 , Vancouver,
 Canada. 
 
Area chair for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining at EMNLP-2017 ,
 Copenhagen, Denmark. 

Event 

A symphony orchestra performed music composed using the
 NRC Emotion Lexicon under the glass of the Louvre museum
 in Paris on Sept. 20, 2016. Click here for a video
 
 of the performance .

 Articles published in the Washington
 
 Post , CBS
 
 News , Columbia Tribune , and others. 

Journal Paper 

Stance and Sentiment in Tweets. Saif
 M. Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. Special Section of the ACM Transactions on Internet
 Technology on Argumentation in Social Media,  2017,
 
 17(3) . 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX        Data and
 Visualization 

Papers 

Metaphor as a Medium for Emotion: An Empirical
 Study . Saif M. Mohammad, Ekaterina Shutova,
 and Peter Turney. In Proceedings of the Joint
 Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics
 (*Sem) , August 2016, Berlin, Germany. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation       Data
 
 and Interactive Visualization 
 
 Detecting Stance in Tweets And Analyzing its
 Interaction with Sentiment. Parinaz Sobhani,
 Saif M. Mohammad, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings
 
 of the Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
 Semantics (*Sem) , August 2016, Berlin, Germany. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation       Data and
 Visualization 
 
 Determining Word-Emotion Associations from
 Tweets by Multi-Label Classification. Felipe
 Bravo-Marquez, Eibe Frank, Saif Mohammad, and Bernhard
 Pfahringer. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/WIC/ACM
 International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI'16),
 October 2016, Omaha, Nebraska, USA. 

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX    Data (scroll to section on this paper) 

Invited Talk 

Sentiment and Emotions in Tweets. Department of
 Geography & Geoinformation Science at George Mason
 University . May 29, 2016, FairFax, Virginia.

 Presentation 

Professional Community Involvement 

Publicity Chair for the 2016 meeting of
 the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural
 Language Processing. ( EMNLP-2016 ). 
 
Area Chair for Sentiment and Opinion
 Mining at EMNLP 2016. 

Book Chapter 

Challenges in Sentiment Analysis. Saif
 M. Mohammad, A Practical Guide to Sentiment
 Analysis , Springer, 2016.

 Pre-print
 version (pdf)      BibTeX 

Papers 

Capturing Reliable Fine-Grained
 Sentiment Associations by Crowdsourcing and Best-Worst
 Scaling. Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M.
 Mohammad. In Proceedings of the 15th
 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
 Language Technologies, June 2016, San Diego, California.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation     Data     
 
 Sentiment Composition of Words
 with Opposing Polarities. Svetlana
 Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of
 the 15th Annual Conference of the North
 American Chapter of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, June
 2016, San Diego, California.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Poster     Data: Opposing
 
 Polarity Sentiment Lexicon     Interactive
 
 Visualization 
 
 The Effect of Negators, Modals, and Degree
 Adverbs on Sentiment Composition. Svetlana
 Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad, In Proceedings of
 the NAACL 2016 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
 Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social Media (WASSA), June 2016, San Diego, California. 

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation     Data
 
 ( Sentiment
 
 Composition Lexicon of Negators, Modals, and Adverbs
 (SCL-NMA) ) and Visualization 
 
 Semeval-2016 Task 6: Detecting
 Stance in Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana
 Kiritchenko, Parinaz Sobhani, Xiaodan Zhu, and Colin
 Cherry. In Proceedings of the International
 Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval ’16) .
 June 2016. San Diego, California.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX      Presentation     Task
 Website 
 
 Semeval-2016 Task 7:
 Determining Sentiment Intensity of English and Arabic
 Phrases. Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M.
 Mohammad, and Mohammad Salameh. In Proceedings of
 the International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
 (SemEval ’16) . June 2016. San Diego, California.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX      Presentation      Task
 Website 
 
 A Practical Guide to Sentiment Annotation:
 Challenges and Solutions. Saif M. Mohammad,
 In Proceedings of the NAACL 2016 Workshop on
 Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment,
 and Social Media (WASSA) , June 2016, San Diego,
 California.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation     
 
 Sentiment Lexicons for Arabic
 Social Media. Saif M. Mohammad, Mohammad
 Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. In Proceedings
 of the 10th edition of the Language Resources and
 Evaluation Conference , May 2016, Portorož
 (Slovenia).

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation      Video        
 
 Data: Arabic Sentiment Lexicons 
 
 A Dataset for Detecting Stance
 in Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana
 Kiritchenko, Parinaz Sobhani, Xiaodan Zhu, and Colin
 Cherry. In Proceedings of the 10th edition of the
 Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , May
 2016, Portorož (Slovenia).

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Presentation     Data: Stance Dataset     Interactive
 Visualization 
 
 Happy Accident: A
 Sentiment Composition Lexicon for Opposing Polarities Phrases. Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings
 
 of the 10th edition of the Language Resources and
 Evaluation Conference , May 2016, Portorož
 (Slovenia).

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Poster    
 
 Data : Opposing
 Polarity Sentiment Lexicon     Interactive
 
 Visualization 

Book Chapter 

Sentiment Analysis: Detecting Valence,
 Emotions, and Other Affectual States from Text. Saif M. Mohammad, Emotion Measurement , 2016.

 Pre-print version
 (pdf)     BibTeX 

 This is a survey on automatic methods for affect
 analysis. 

Interactive Visualization and Paper 

Imagisaurus: An Interactive Visualizer of
 Valence and Emotion in the Roget’s Thesaurus. Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2015
 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity,
 Sentiment, and Social Media (WASSA) , September
 2015, Lisbon, Portugal.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Interactive
 Visualization 

Data 

The NRC Emotion Lexicon is now available in over 20 languages . 

Journal Paper 

How
 Translation Alters Sentiment . Saif M. Mohammad, Mohammad Salameh, and Svetlana
 Kiritchenko, Journal of Artificial
 Intelligence Research , January 2016, 55:95-130.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX     Data:
 
 Arabic Sentiment Lexicons 

Professional Community Involvement 

Organizing these shared task
 competitions under the aegis of SemEval-2016 (see webpage for schedule): 

Detecting
 
 Stance in Tweets (new task) . Saif M.
 Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Parinaz Sobhani,
 Xiaodan Zhu, and Colin Cherry. 
 
 Determining
 
 sentiment intensity of English and Arabic phrases .
 Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M Mohammad, and Mohammad
 Salameh. This is an expansion of the SemEval-2015 Task
 10 subtask E - Determining
 
 strength of association of Twitter terms with
 positive sentiment (or, degree of prior polarity) . 

Journal Paper 

Developing
 
 a Successful SemEval Task in Sentiment Analysis of
 Twitter and Other Social Media Texts .Preslav
 Nakov, Sara Rosenthal, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M.
 Mohammad, Zornitsa Kozareva, Alan Ritter, Veselin
 Stoyanov, and Xiaodan Zhu. Language Resources and
 Evaluation. January 2016, 50(1):35-65.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)    Preprint
 
 Version (pdf)     BibTeX 

Tutorial 

Computational
 
 Analysis of Affect and Emotion in Language. Saif
 M. Mohammad and Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. Tutorial at the
 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural Language
 Processing, September 2015, Lisboa, Portugal.

 Presentation          Annotated
 
 Bibliography      
 
    Extended
 
 Bibliography        Proposal 

Paper s 

SemEval-2015 Task 10: Sentiment
 Analysis in Twitter . Sara Rosenthal, Preslav
 Nakov, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M Mohammad, Alan
 Ritter, and Veselin Stoyanov. In Proceedings of the
 ninth international workshop on Semantic Evaluation
 Exercises (SemEval-2015), June 2015, Denver, Colorado.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX 
 
 Sentiment After Translation: A
 Case-Study on Arabic Social Media Posts .
 Mohammad Salameh, Saif M. Mohammad, and Svetlana
 Kiritchenko, In Proceedings of the North
 
 American Chapter of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2015), June
 
 2015, Denver, Colorado.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX   Data:
 
 rabic Sentiment Lexicons 

Visualization 
 Explore the interactive
 visualization for the NRC Word-Emotion Association
 Lexicon. 
 
 Symposium 

My N is Ten Million: Using
 Social Media to Track Emotion, Mental Health, and
 Measure Personality Across Entire Populations .
 Gregory J Park, Saif M Mohammad, and Johannes C
 Eichstaedt. A symposium at the International Convention
 of Psychological Science (ICPS), March 2015, Amsterdam,
 The Netherlands. 

Tutorial 

Sentiment Analysis of Social
 Media Texts. Saif M. Mohammad and Xiaodan
 Zhu. Tutorial at the 2014 Conference
 on Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing,
 October 2014, Doha, Qatar.

 Presentation    Video    Proposal 

Professional Community Involvement 

I am serving as Publicity Chair for the
 2015 meeting of the North American Association for
 Computational Linguistics ( NAACL-2015 ).
 
 I am also the Area Chair for Sentiment and Opinion
 Mining. 

Invited Talk 

The
 
 Words are Alive: Associations with Sentiment,
 Emotions, Colours, and Music . Invited
 talk at Language Technology Institute, Carnegie Mellon
 University, September 2014, Pittsburgh, PA.

 Presentation    Video 

Journal Paper 

Sentiment,
 
 Emotion, Purpose, and Style in Electoral Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and
 Joel Martin. Information Processing and Management ,
 Volume 51, Issue 4, July 2015, Pages 480–499. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX     AnnotatedData 

Invited Talk 

Words: Evaluative, Emotional,
 Colourful, Musical! Keynote
 speech at the ACL
 2014 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
 Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social Media (WASSA) ,
 June 27, 2014, Baltimore, MD.

 Presentation 

Journal Paper s 

Experiments
 
 with Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical
 Entailment. Peter D. Turney, Saif M.
 Mohammad, Natural Language Engineering, 21(3):437-476, May 2015.

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX 
 
 Using
 
 Hashtags to Capture Fine Emotion Categories from
 Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana
 Kiritchenko, Computational Intelligence, 31( 2):301-326, May 2015.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX 

Professional Community Involvement 

One of the organizers of SemEval-2015
 Task 10 - Sentiment
 
 Analysis in Twitter . Of special interest to me is
 subtask E - Determining strength of association of
 Twitter terms with positive sentiment (or, degree of
 prior polarity). Task description, trial data, test
 data, and other details available here . 

Journal Paper 

Sentiment
 
 Analysis of Short Informal Texts. Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu and Saif Mohammad. Journal
 
 of Artificial Intelligence Research, volume 50,
 pages 723-762, August 2014.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX 

Paper s 

NRC-Canada-2014: Detecting
 Aspects and Sentiment in Customer Reviews ,
 Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, Colin Cherry, and
 Saif M. Mohammad. In Proceedings of the eighth
 international workshop on Semantic Evaluation Exercises
 (SemEval-2014), August 2014, Dublin, Ireland.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Poster 
 
 Official
 
 Rankings : Our team (NRC-Canada) ranked first in
 three of the six subtasks. About 30 teams participated. 
 
 NRC-Canada-2014: Recent
 Improvements in the Sentiment Analysis of Tweets ,
 Xiaodan Zhu, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Saif M. Mohammad.
 In Proceedings of the eighth international workshop on
 Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2014), August
 2014, Dublin, Ireland.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     Poster 
 
 Official
 
 Rankings: Our team (NRC-Canada) ranked first in
 five of the ten subtask-domain combinations. About 40
 teams participated. 
 
 An Empirical Study on the
 Effect of Negation Words on Sentiment. Xiaodan
 
 Zhu, Hongyu Guo, Saif Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko.
 In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics , June
 2014, Baltimore, MD.

 Paper
 
 (pdf)     BibTeX 
 
 Semantic Role Labeling of
 Emotions in Tweets. Saif M. Mohammad, Xiaodan
 Zhu, and Joel Martin, In Proceedings of the ACL 2014
 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity,
 Sentiment, and Social Media (WASSA), June 2014,
 Baltimore, MD.

 Paper (pdf)     BibTeX     AnnotatedData 
 
 Generating Music from
 Literature. Hannah Davis and Saif M.
 Mohammad, In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on
 Computational Linguistics for Literature , April
 2014, Gothenburg, Sweden. 

 Paper
 (pdf)     BibTeX     TransProse
 Website 

Notable Press Mentions: The
 
 Physics arXiv Blog , March 20, 2014, TIME ,
 May 7, 2014, PC
 
 World , May 15, 2014, Popular
 
 Science , May 14, 2014, io9 ,
 May 12, 2014, LiveScience ,
 May 11, 2014. 

MENTORSHIP, COLLABORATIONS, COMMITTEES, TALKS 

I enjoy working with others, especially early researchers (grad students, post-docs, etc.) with expertise in NLP, Psychology, Digital Humanities, Social Sciences, etc. See the amazing work these current early-researcher collaborators are doing:

Sophie Wu 
 
 Daniela Teoderescu 
 
 Jan P Wahle 

Krishnapriya Vishnubhotla 

Nedjma Ousidhoum 
 
 Shamsuddeen H Muhammad 
 
 Terry Ruas 
 
 Aniket Pramanick 

I am happy to serve on thesis committees in the areas of emotions and language, sentiment analysis, CSS, ethics in AI, lexical semantics, computational literary analysis, etc. 

If you are a graduate student or early researcher and think I can provide any guidance or mentorship, feel free to reach out. I am always happy to listen, chat, and act as a sounding board. I usually reserve time once in two weeks and hold zoom chats for this. 

QUICK LINKS 
 
 Presence in Research Networks: 

ACL Anthology 
 
 DBLP 
 
 Google Scholar page of Saif 

Google Scholar pages of NLP Researchers at NRC 

LinkedIn 
 
 NRC 
 
 Research Gate 
 
 Semantic Scholar 
 
 Twitter 

See this webpage on Computational Affective Science . 
 
 Emotion Lexicons (in over 100 languages): 

the NRC Emotion Lexicon 

the NRC Affect / Emotion Intensity Lexicon 

the NRC Valence, Arousal, and Dominance Lexicon (version 2.1 released March 2025) 

the NRC WorryWords Lexicon (a word--anxiety association lexicon) 

the NRC Word-Colour
 Association Lexicon 

all lexicons 

Software 

Emotion Dynamics: Python Scripts to analyze emotions in text using emotion lexicons. The script generates a csv file with a number of emotion features of the text, including metrics of utterance emotion dynamics . Associated Paper . 

Other Resources: 

Best-Worst Scaling Research, Scripts, and Data 

2021 Survey on Emotion Detection from Text and Sentiment Analysis 

The NRC-Canada Sentiment Anaysis system 

Pinned Blog Posts 

March 2020, Ten Years of the NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon 

Ten years back, with some anticipation and lots of excitement, Peter Turney and I introduced the NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon . So grateful that, over the years, so many people have put their hopes and trust in it. Such joy to see them boldly shine a light on the human condition — the positives and the negatives; not shying away even from sadness, fear, and anger. This blog bost puts a spotlight on ten favorites (includes fun video and audio clips as well as links to papers and popular press articles): 

October 2019, The State of NLP Literature 

This series of posts presents a diachronic analysis of the ACL Anthology — Or, as I like to think of it, making sense of NLP Literature through pictures. 

PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES 
 
2026 

Programme Chair for *Sem 2026

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics (journal)

Action Editor, Transactions of ACL (TACL) (journal) 

Senior Area Chair for EMNLP 2026, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Area Chair for ACL 2026, Human-AI Interaction/Cooperation and Human-Centric NLP

Senior Area Chair for EACL 2026, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Action Editor for ACL Rolling Review.

Organizer of the Innaugural Computational Affective Science (CAS) Workshop

2025 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics (journal)

Action Editor, Transactions of ACL (TACL) (journal) 

Senior Area Chair for AACL 2025, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Area Chair for EMNLP 2025, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Area Chair for ACL 2025, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Action Editor for ACL Rolling Review

Best Paper Committee AACL 2025

Best Paper Committee EMNLP 2025

2024 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics (journal)

Action Editor, Transactions of ACL (TACL) (journal) 

Associate Editor , Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 

Senior Area Chair for ACL 2024, Resources and Evaluation track

Senior Area Chair for EMNLP 2024, Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining

Senior Action Editor for ACL Rolling Review

Senior Area Chair for Ethics and NLP, EACL 2024 

2023 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics (journal)

Action Editor, Transactions of ACL (TACL) (journal) 

Associate Editor , Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 

Senior Action Editor for ACL Rolling Review in the area of Ethics and NLP

Senior Area Chair for Sentiment Analyisis and Argument Mining, EMNLP 2023

Area Chair for Ethics and Sustainable NLP, EACL 2023 

2022 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics (journal)

Action Editor, Transactions of ACL (TACL) (journal) 

Inaugural Senior Action Editor for ACL Rolling Review in the area of Ethics and NLP

Area Chair for Ethics and NLP, ACL 2022

Area Chair for the EMNLP 2022 theme track “Open questions, major obstacles, and unresolved issues in NLP” 

2021 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics 

Action Editor , ACL Rolling Review 

Senior Area Chair for Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining, ACL-IJCNLP-2021 

2020 

Action Editor , Computational Linguistics 

Senior Area Chair for Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining, EMNLP-2020, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic

Area Chair for Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, and Argument Mining, StarSem-2020, Barcelona, Spain

Reviewer for Nature 

Workshops Co-chair ACL-2020, Seattle, USA 

Area chair for Lexical Semantics, ACL-2020, Seattle, USA

Member of the COLING 2020 Ethics Advisory Group 

2019 

Area chair for Sentiment Analysis and Argumentation Mining, EMNLP-IJCNLP-2019, Hong Kong, China

Area chair for Sentiment Analysis and Argumentation Mining, ACL-2019, Florence, Italy

Area chair for Ethics, Bias and Fairness, NAACL-2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA

Area chair for Semantics in NLP Applications, *Sem-2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA

General Chair of the 2019 Canada–UK Symposium on Ethics in AI, Ottawa, Canada

Co-chair of SemEval 2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, ACL-2019, Florence, Italy

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, NAACL-2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA 

2018 

Co-chair of SemEval-2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

Co-organizer of WASSA-2018, Brussels, Belgium

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, NAACL-2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, ACL-2018, Melbourne, Australia. 

2017 

Co-chair of SemEval-2017, Vancouver, Canada

Co-organizer of WASSA-2017, Copenhagen, Denmark

Area chair for Sentiment and Opinion Mining, ACL-2017, Vancouver, Canada

Area chair for Sentiment and Opinion Mining, EMNLP-2017, Copenhagen, Denmark

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, ACL-2017, Vancouver, Canada. 

2016 

Area chair for Sentiment and Opinion Mining, EMNLP-2016, Austin, Texas, USA

Publicity chair, EMNLP-2016, Austin, Texas, USA

2015 

Area chair for Sentiment and Opinion Mining, NAACL-2015, Denver, Colorado

Publicity chair, NAACL-2015, Denver, Colorado

Mentor, Student Research Workshop, NAACL-2015, Denver, Colorado

2014, 2012, 2011 

Mentor, Student Research Workshops, ACL-2014, NAACL-2012, ACL-2011 

Most years 2008–present 

Program committee member for top NLP journals and conferences, including TACL, ACL, NAACL, EMNLP, CL, CI, NLE, JAIR, TSLP, IJCNLP, ICWSM, and IJCAI. 

NOTABLE WEB/PRESS MENTIONS 

The Economist, Apr 24, 2025. America’s poster-in-chief is very, very online . 

Towards Data Science, Feb 13, 2024. Lexicon-Based Sentiment Analysis Using R. 

Atlanta Regional, April 10, 2023. Understanding Atlanta: Insights from Sentiment Analysis on Twitter. 

CBC Radio, Feb 12, 2021. Automatic emotion detection: benefits and potential harms.

The Economist, Jan 12, 2021. How Donald Trump evolved into a prolific, angry Twitter user. Use of the NRC Emotion lexicon to Analyze emotions in tweets by Donald Trump.

AdNews, April 20, 2020. Coronavirus: Analysing stories from the Twitter frontline . Use of the NRC Emotion lexicon to Analyze emotions in tweets during the Covid-19 pandemic. 

Tech Xplore, February 26, 2020. A language generation system that can compose creative poetry . The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used along with a deep learning system for automatic poetry generation. Original paper: Introducing Aspects of Creativity in Automatic Poetry Generation . 

USA Today, Dec 24, 2019. Analysis: Trump more negative, prolific on Twitter amid Democratic impeachment inquiry. Use of the NRC Emotion lexicon to Analyze emotions in tweets by Donald Trump. 

Universo Online , Dec 5, 2019. Gender bias in sentiment analysis systems and gender disparities in language. 

Politico.mx, August 28, 2019. Enojo o sorpresa: emociones en Informes de López Portillo a Calderó . The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze the speeches of the Mexican President and other politicians.

Gender and Racial Bias in Cloud NLP Sentiment APIs , Aug 21, 2019. Article looking into race and gender biases in the Google and AWS cloud sentiment analysis APIs using  the Equity Evaluation Corpus and the techniques we published in 2018 .

The New York Times, February 26, 2019. Extreme Weather Can Feel ‘Normal’ After Just a Few Years, Study Finds. Brief interview on my opinion on work on perceptions of climate change. 

Psychology Today, December 27, 2018. Emotional Contagions Can Spread Like Wildfire Via YouTube. The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze the emotions in user comments on vlogs.  Original Paper: Multilevel emotion transfer on YouTube: Disentangling the effects of emotional contagion and homophily on video audiences. 

InformationWeek, November 15, 2018. Decoding Programmers: How Emotions Can Change Code . Analyzing developer comments to show that their emotions impact their code. 

Medium, DAIR, Artificial Intelligence Research, Perspectives, and Technologies, Aug 2, 2018. Examining Gender and Race Bias in Sentiment Analysis Systems. 

SeekingAlpha, Apr. 30, 2018. A Sentiment Analysis Approach To Predicting Stock Returns. The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze 10-K reports of S&P 500 companies to predict future stock returns. 

Technical.ly, February 1, 2018. Who’s the angriest character on ‘Seinfeld’? The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze the language of the characters in Seinfeld. 

January 24, 2018. An examination of the Twitter habits of Kentucky lawmakers . The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze the tweets of Democrats and Republicans. 

April 13, 2017.  Faster but less furious: why the Fast and Furious franchise is a box office goldmine . The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used to analyze the emotions in the Fast and Furious series movie scripts. 

The Crosstab, March 2, 2017. Trump's
 
 SOTU vs. the Past — Sentiment Analysis and Topic
 Modeling .

Esquire, February 23, 2017. All
 
 Radiohead Songs Are Sad, but This Graph Shows Which
 Are the Saddest. The NRC Emotion Lexicon is used
 to compute the degree of sadness for Radiohead songs. Interactive
 
 Chart. 

 Also picked up in:

A Journal of Musical Things, February 24, 2017. Science
 
 Discovers Which Radiohead Song is the Saddest 
 
Thomas Park, February 28. Where
 
 I End and You Begin: Finding the Most Depressing
 Radiohead Songs using Crowd Data from
 SongMeanings. 

Religion in Public, February 13, 2017. Evangelical
 
 leaders are as negative on immigration and Islam as
 Donald Trump. 

February 11, 2017. Text
 
 Analysis of NHL Hockey Coach Interviews. 

Washington Post, October 22, 2016. Donald Trump and Hillary
 Clinton took to the debate stage and made sweet, sweet
 music. The article mentions NRC in relation to the
 lexicons we created, which were used to generate music
 from the Trump-Hillary debate text. 

Washington
 
 Post , CBS
 
 News , Columbia Tribune , and others, September 23, 2016. This
 
 symphony had both human and computer composers. Articles about a symphony orchestra performed music
 composed using the NRC Emotion Lexicon under the glass
 of the Louvre museum in Paris on Sept. 20, 2016. Click
 here for a video
 
 of the performance .

Washington Post, August 12, 2016. Two people write Trump’s tweets. He writes the angrier
 ones. 

BGR, August 11, 2016. Donald
 
 Trump’s angriest tweets are sent from his Android
 while the nice ones are sent from an iPhone .

NYC Data Science Academy, August 7, 2016. Twitter
 
 Analysis of Presidential Candidates 2016. 

Variance Explained, August 6, 2016. Text
 
 analysis of Trump's tweets confirms he writes only the
 (angrier) Android half .

News also picked up by NPR , Los
 
 Angeles Times , Scientific
 
 American , The
 
 Verge , and others.

The
 
 Telegraph , June 15, 2016: EU referendum:
 Remain uses Project Fear more in tweets than Leave,
 analysis shows. [Use of the NRC Emotion Lexicon,
 aka EmoLex, to track sentiment in EU referendum tweets
 (Brexit).]

An art project, the Wishing
 Wall , that uses the NRC Emotion lexicon was
 displayed in:

Tekniska Museet, Stockholm, Sweden (Oct 2014 – Aug
 2015) 
 
Onassis Cultural Centre, Athens (19th Oct 2015 –
 10th Jan 2016) 
 
Zorlu Centre in Istanbul (16th Feb – 12th Jun
 2016) 

Fast
 
 Company , March 25, 2016: An Emotional Map Of
 The City, As Captured Through Its Sounds. [Use of
 the NRC Emotion Lexicon, aka EmoLex to create Chatty Maps .]

Press
 
 release stating the use of EmoLex to create Chatty
 Maps.

PC
 
 World , May 15, 2014: AI System Reads Novels,
 Writes Music for Them. 

Billboard, May 19, 2014. Computers, Classics and Cadenzas: Making Math Music From Literature . On our work on automatically generating music that captures the emotions in a novel. 

Popular
 
 Science , May 14, 2014: Robot Reads Novels,
 Writes Songs about Them. 

io9 ,
 May 12, 2014: Researchers Train Computers to
 Manipulate Human Emotions with Art. 

LiveScience ,
 May 11, 2014: 'TransProse' Software Creates Musical
 Soundtracks from Books. 

TIME ,
 May 7, 2014: This Is What Classic Novels Sound Like
 When a Computer Turns Them Into Piano Music. 

SlashDot ,
 March23, 2014: Algorithm Composes Music By Text
 Analyzing the World's Best Novels .

The
 
 Physics arXiv Blog , March 20, 2014: The Music
 Composed By An Algorithm Analysing The World’s Best
 Novels. 

Glass
 
 Hammer , December 3, 2013: Are Your Emails
 Communicating a Lack of Confidence? 

Singularity
 
 Hub , November 10, 2013: Algorithm Tracks
 Literary Emotion in Shakespeare, the Brothers Grimm. 

The
 
 Physics ArXiv , October 4, 2013: Data
 
 Mining Reveals the Emotional Differences in Emails
 Written by Men and Women. 

SlashDot , October 4, 2013: Data Mining Reveals the Emotional
 Differences In Emails From Men and Women. 

The
 
 Physics ArXiv , October 1, 2013: Text
 
 Analyser Reveals Emotional Temperature of Novels and
 Fairy Tales. 

Also in EduBits

SlashDot ,
 October 1, 2013: Text Analyzer Reveals Emotional
 'Temperature' of Novels and Fairy Tales 

The
 
 New Scientist , September 27: What your email
 style says about your personality 

Also in Times of India, MSN, Pharmacon, Galileo,
 Amic, and others 

Article in MIT Technology Review , September 5,
 2013: How Mechanical Turkers Crowdsourced a Huge
 Lexicon of Links Between Words and Emotion. 

Also in its Spanish
 
 website and in crowdsourcing.org . 

TIME ,
 August 14, 2013: Main Tweet: Researchers Dig Into
 The Intersection of Politics and Twitter . 

Organization of International Shared Task Competitions 

Co-chair of SemEval 2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA

Co-chair of SemEval-2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

 (12 tasks, 196 papers, ~1000 participants)

Organizer of SemEval-2018 Task 1: Affect in Tweets (75 teams and about 200 participants)

Co-chair of SemEval-2017, Vancouver, Canada

 (12 tasks, 181 papers, ~900 participants) 

Organizer of shared task on detecting emotion intensity at WASSA-2017

Co-organizer of Semeval-2016 Task 6: Detecting Stance in Tweets

Co-organizer of Semeval-2016 Task 7: Determining Sentiment Intensity of English and Arabic Phrases

Co-organizer of SemEval-2015 Task 10: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter

Co-organizer of SemEval-2012 Task 2: Measuring Degrees of Relational Similarity

.. Tweets: SaifMMohammad
